Title: Fusing Backdoors, Machine Learning, and Optimization for Large-Scale Parametric Mixed-Integer Programs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21440v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 00:59:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
# Fusing Backdoors, Machine Learning, and Optimization for Large-Scale Parametric Mixed-Integer Programs 

El Mehdi Er Raqabi, 1,2,∗ Pascal Van Hentenryck 2

> 1

Department of Operations and Decision Systems, Université Laval, Québec, Canada 

> 2

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 

> ∗

Corresponding Author: el-mehdi.er-raqabi@fsa.ulaval.ca 

Abstract 

Large-scale optimization problems are often solved repeatedly under similar structural con-ditions, leading to substantial computational overhead. This occurs in applications such as power systems, transportation, and supply chain networks, where the underlying structure is fixed while parameters frequently vary under perturbations. This paper proposes a Learning to Optimize (LTO) framework that accelerates the solution of large-scale general mixed-integer problems by leveraging the concept of a backdoor, i.e., a subset of variables that drive most of the computational complexity. The proposed BIPC 

framework consists of three phases. Phase I is an identification procedure that discovers a backdoor for a set of instances in the distribution. Phase II uses supervised learning to develop 

machine learning models that, given an instance, predict values for bounded-domain backdoor variables and intervals for wide-domain backdoor variables. These predictions define a reduced optimization problem where the predictions constrain the backdoor variables, while the other variables remain free. Phase III optimizes this reduced problem and, if necessary, applies a 

correction step to restore feasibility or the optimality guarantees. Experiments on real-world, large-scale problems show substantial reductions in solution time with only a limited loss in solution quality. The framework enables organizations to solve large-scale optimization problems efficiently in the presence of frequent perturbations, such as unexpected events, demand fluctuations, or operational changes. Because these changes affect parameters rather than the problem structure, BIPC can quickly provide high-quality, feasible solutions, offering a practical approach to integrating machine learning into existing optimization pipelines. 

Keywords : large-scale optimization, machine learning, mixed-integer programming, optimization proxies, parametric optimization 

1

> arXiv:2606.21440v1 [cs.LG] 19 Jun 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Large-scale optimization problems play a central role in many real-world applications, including power systems, transportation, and supply chain networks. In practice, these problems are often solved repeatedly under similar structural conditions. Still, parameters such as demand, resource availability, or operational constraints change over time due to unexpected events or fluctuations. Formally, these problems are often referred to as parametric optimization problems, i.e., problems that share the same overall structure, e.g., the same generators in power systems (Er Raqabi et al., 2025a), the same conveyors and quays in downstream coastal planning (Er Raqabi et al., 2025b), the same facilities in package delivery (Mohan et al., 2025), the same machines in a manufacturing layout Moinuddin et al. (2026), with only parameters changing, making numerous instances of data typically related (Akhlaghi et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025). These parametric problems are usually modeled using general mixed integer programs (MIPs) of the form 

ϕ(P) = argmin {c⊤x | Ax ≤ b, x ∈ Rn, x i ∈ Z ∀i ∈ I} ,

where P = ( A, b, c) is the instance data, A ∈ Rm×n, b ∈ Rm, c ∈ Rn, and I ⊆ { 1, . . . , n }

denotes the index set of general integer variables. Solving each instance of this parametric problem from scratch can be computationally expensive and time-consuming, thereby limiting the ability of organizations to respond quickly to real-time operational changes, meet real-time constraints, and implement interaction optimization tools exploring many scenarios. This motivates the development of approaches that exploit the repetitive structure of these prob-lems to accelerate computation while maintaining solution quality and feasibility. Large-scale op-timization problems have traditionally been solved using exact methods such as MIP solvers and decomposition algorithms, or using heuristic and metaheuristic approaches (Er Raqabi, 2024). To accelerate computation, practitioners often employ warm-starting, valid inequalities, and fixing tech-niques, as well as surrogate models that exploit problem structure (Er Raqabi et al., 2024). More recently, learning-augmented methods have been proposed to guide optimization, for example, by predicting feasible solutions, variable bounds, or partial assignments (Bengio et al., 2021; Akhlaghi et al., 2025). These approaches have been applied across a range of domains, including transporta-2tion planning (Morabit et al., 2021), supply chain network design (Cai et al., 2025), and power system operations (Chen et al., 2023), demonstrating their potential to reduce computational time while maintaining solution quality in specific settings. Despite these advances, existing methods face limitations when applied to large-scale parametric optimization problems that are fundamentally different in nature: (1) they are expressed in terms of integer variables that can take large values, as they represent multi-faceted decisions, including procurement, production, and inventory decisions over a long time horizon; and (2) they typically feature millions of integer variables. As a result, many existing techniques that fuse operations research (OR) and machine learning (ML) are not directly applicable. Some approaches focus on predicting only integer variables taking zero values at optimality, which may not always be sufficient for real-world instances when some non-zero variables must be determined accurately to solve the problem efficiently (Akhlaghi et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025). The intuition in this research is that predicting the values of all integer variables xi ∈ I is hard and costly and often yields infeasible solutions, i.e., solutions that require repairs. Instead, this paper recognizes that, for various classes of parametric MIPs, there exists a subset B ⊆ I of integer variables, called a backdoor , that, when fixed, creates a lower-dimensional problem that is much easier to solve. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is no general framework that systematically identifies backdoors for parametric optimization problems. This motivates the development of the Backdoor Identification, Prediction, and Correction ( BIPC )framework for parametric MIPs that combines backdoor identification, ML, and repair mechanisms to obtain, in reasonable time, high-quality solutions to instances of parametric MIPs. This paper is a detailed presentation of BIPC and makes the following contributions: 1. The BIPC Framework. The paper presents a novel 3-phase framework to obtain high-quality solutions to parametric MIPs. Phase I identifies a backdoor that drives most of the computational complexity for a class of instances. Phase II uses ML to predict values or restricted domains for the backdoor variables. Phase III uses optimization to complete the partial assignment and possibly corrects the predictions using repair mechanisms. 2. The BIPC Predictions. Unlike existing methods for MIP models that often predict only zeros for integer variables or focus on 0-1 MIPs, BIPC predicts all backdoor variables. For 3integer variables spanning a short range, BIPC predicts a specific value. For integer variables spanning a large range, it predicts 0 or restricted domains. BIPC thus generalizes existing methods in the literature (Akhlaghi et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025). 3. The BIPC Taxonomy. The paper presents a taxonomy for designing BIPC for a given parametric optimization MIP. The taxonomy includes the problem size, variable types, and feature types. 4. BIPC Applications and Computational Results. BIPC is tested on five real-world large-scale problems: a middle-mile consolidation network design (MMCNP), a strategic loco-motive assignment problem (SLAP), exam class scheduling (COURSE), a downstream supply chain planning (OCP), and an order fulfillment problem (OFP). The results demonstrate consistent and significant reductions in solution time while maintaining solution quality. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature on learning-based methods and proxy approaches. Section 3 presents an overview of BIPC . Section 4 introduces the BIPC taxonomy and methodology. Sections 5–7 discuss the three BIPC phases in detail. Section 8 describes the experimental design and the real-world large-scale problems considered. Section 9 reports computational results and analyzes the performance of the BIPC 

framework. Finally, Section 10 concludes the paper and outlines directions for future research. 

# 2 Literature Review 

The use of ML for MIPs has attracted significant attention in recent years. It is increasingly recognized as a promising direction to overcome some of the computational challenges (Bengio et al., 2021; Kotary et al., 2021; Vesselinova et al., 2020), especially for problems that can only be solved by fusing the powers of OR and ML (Van Hentenryck and Dalmeijer, 2024). Learning-based approaches are well known for their ability to yield effective empirical algorithms that leverage regularities in large real-world datasets and improve solution times (Cappart et al., 2021; Kotary et al., 2021; Morabit et al., 2021; Khalil et al., 2022a). The integration of optimization and ML recently led to the development of several distinct ap-proaches, surveyed by Kotary et al. (2021). These methods, often referred to by various names in 4the literature, can be categorized into three main categories, increasingly hybridized: 1) Decision-focused learning, 2) Optimization proxies, and 3) Learning to optimize. Decision-focused learning, also called smart-predict-then-optimize or predict-and-search, aims at training forecasting and op-timization models in the same pipeline (see e.g., Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022); El Balghiti et al. (2019); Ning and You (2019); Sahinidis (2004); Donti et al. (2017)). Optimization proxies aims at learning the mapping between the input and an optimal solution of an optimization problem (see e.g., Chen et al. (2023); Kotary et al. (2021, 2022); Donti et al. (2021); Huang and Chen (2021); Park and Van Hentenryck (2023)). Learning to optimize focuses on techniques to improve the efficiency and the solution quality of optimization algorithms and solvers (Tang and Yao, 2024; Maragno et al., 2025). This paper is a hybridization of these three categories and is the first to leverage their combined capabilities. 

Decision-focused learning. In decision-focused learning, Park et al. (2023) introduce the Predict-Repair-Optimize framework, which predicts an optimal solution, fixes a subset of variables with confident predictions, and restores feasibility with a dedicated repair algorithm. A final optimization step is applied to complete the partial assignment. Han et al. (2023) propose a novel predict-and-search (PaS) framework that adopts the trust region method, which searches for near-optimal solutions within a well-defined region. Their approach uses a trained graph neural network (GNN) to predict marginal probabilities of binary variables in a given MIP instance. It then searches for near-optimal solutions within the trust region using these predictions. Huang et al. (2024a) propose the ConPaS framework that learns to predict solutions to MIPs with contrastive learning. ConPaS collects both high-quality solutions as positive samples and low-quality or infeasible solutions as negative samples, and learns to make discriminative predictions by contrasting these samples. It then fixes the assignments for a subset of integer variables and solves the resulting reduced MIP to obtain high-quality solutions. ConPaS was evaluated on four classes of binary MIPs. Most of these approaches primarily evaluate their algorithms on binary problems. Cai et al. (2025) extend the PaS framework to parametric MIPs and introduce ID-PaS+ , an identity-aware learning framework that enables the ML model to handle heterogeneous variables more effectively. Experiments on several real-world large-scale problems demonstrate that ID-PaS+ consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art solvers Gurobi and PaS. 5Optimization Proxies. Optimization proxies have accumulated great success for continuous opti-mization problems. Tanneau and Van Hentenryck (2024) present dual Lagrangian learning (DLL), a principled learning methodology for dual conic optimization proxies. The proposed methodology significantly outperforms a state-of-the-art learning-based method and achieves 1000 × speedups over commercial interior-point solvers with optimality gaps under 0.5% on average. However, they encounter feasibility and training challenges when discrete variables are present (Tran et al., 2021; Fioretto et al., 2020; Detassis et al., 2021; Guan et al., 2026). Learning models for discrete opti-mization problems lack useful gradients because the arg-max operator is piecewise constant, which complicates backpropagation. One way to address this is to construct effective approximations of the gradients, e.g., by generating continuous surrogates of the MIP to facilitate effective training (Ferber et al., 2020; Kotary et al., 2021; Donti et al., 2017; Wilder et al., 2019). This paper combines a partial proxy with a correction phase to handle the discrete context. The focus is on the backdoor variables xi, i ∈ B , which drive complexity. Then, the solution is completed. The correction phase restores feasibility in case the obtained solution is infeasible. 

Learning to Optimize. Learning to optimize encompasses a wealth of approaches, many of which are reviewed in Lodi and Zarpellon (2017), Bengio et al. (2021), and Kotary et al. (2021). They include techniques to guide search decisions in branch-and-bound/cut solvers (Zarpellon et al., 2021; Gasse et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2020) and direct the application of primal heuris-tics within branch-and-bound (Khalil et al. (2017); Chmiela et al. (2021); Bengio et al. (2020); Song et al. (2020); Ye et al. (2026)). Khalil et al. (2016) highlight that, beyond the supervised learning approaches prevalent in this context, reinforcement learning formulations are worth exploring due to the sequential nature of the variable selection task. Aligned with this observation, Akhlaghi et al. (2025) implement a novel approach that combines the benefits of supervised learning and deep re-inforcement learning. They propose PROPEL , a new framework that integrates optimization with both supervised and deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to reduce the search space significantly. Although it differs from these studies, PROPEL shares some similarities with those focusing on variable selection strategies (Khalil et al. (2016); Alvarez et al. (2017); Balcan et al. (2018)). PRO-PEL uses supervised learning not to predict the values of all integer variables, but to identify the variables fixed to zero in the optimal solution. PROPEL drew inspiration from Park et al. (2023), 6but differs in two key aspects. First, it fixes only the variables to zero, leaving the nonzero integer variables free. Second, it uses deep reinforcement learning to determine which variables to unfix to obtain the desired optimality target. 

Paper Positioning. This work lies at the intersection of learning-based MIP acceleration and the backdoor literature in combinatorial optimization. The first stream learns solution information or solver decisions for MIPs. The PROPEL framework is the closest to this research: 1) it is the first framework that fuses OR and ML for industrial supply chain planning, 2) it considers problems with arbitrary integers, and 3) it is not restricted to graph-based problems and applies to standard MIP formulations. However, it focuses only on predicting variables that take the value 0 among xi ∈ I 

and does not consider the concept of backdoor . Furthermore, PROPEL has been evaluated in a single case study of industrial supply chain planning. The authors highlight the need to consider other classes of applications beyond supply chain planning and other solution techniques for both stages in the PROPEL framework, and the potential for even larger problems than the supply chain planning instances (Akhlaghi et al., 2025). The second stream studies backdoors as structural explanations for solver performance. Back-doors were originally introduced in the Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT) and the constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) as sets of variables whose instantiation makes the remaining problem tractable (Gomes et al., 2000; Williams et al., 2003). This idea was later extended to optimization, where different notions of feasibility and optimality backdoors were proposed for combinatorial op-timization and mixed-integer programming (Dilkina et al., 2007, 2009). More recent work learns effective MILP backdoors using ranking or contrastive learning, but these methods use the predicted backdoor to guide branching decisions inside branch-and-bound rather than to predict variable as-signments or domains (Khalil et al., 2022b; Cai et al., 2024). 

BIPC differs from both streams. It identifies a stable computational backdoor at the level of a parametric MIP family, learns values or intervals for the backdoor variables, and uses these predictions to construct a reduced optimization problem that is then completed and corrected. Thus, the backdoor in BIPC is not merely a branching guide. It is the interface between learning and optimization. 

BIPC extends PROPEL along six axes: 1) Backdoor Variables. BIPC is organized around 7the concept of backdoor: it identifies a backdoor for a parametric MIP and organizes the prediction phase around this backdoor. 2) Prediction. BIPC predicts not only zero-valued variables; it also predicts the values or restricted domains for non-zero variables, 3) Real Case Studies. BIPC is evaluated with five different large-scale real-world applications, 4) Scalability. This paper tackles problems with millions of variables and constraints, addressing problem sizes that are significantly larger than those considered in the existing literature, 5) Transferability. This research broadens the class of MIPs and applications that can benefit the fusion of OR and ML to five applications, and 6) Feasible and High-Quality Solutions. This research reduces the size of the search space by focusing on the backdoor variables and uses correction mechanisms to decide which variables to relax, potentially enhancing feasibility and near-optimality. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, BIPC is the first framework to combine backdoor identi-fication, value or interval prediction, and optimization-based completion for large-scale parametric MIPs with general integer variables. 

# 3 Overview of the BIPC Framework 

Consider the parametric mixed-integer optimization problem 

ϕ(P) = argmin {c⊤x | Ax ≤ b, x ∈ Rn, x i ∈ Z ∀i ∈ I} ,

where multiple instances share the same structural formulation but differ in the instance data 

P = ( A, b, c) with A ∈ Rm×n, b ∈ Rm, c ∈ Rn, and I ⊆ { 1, . . . , n } denotes the index set of general integer variables. The instance data is taken from a distribution D, learned from historical data and/or forecasts. The BIPC framework assumes that a subset B ⊆ I of variables drives most of the complexity in solving instances of ϕ. These variables are often called a backdoor in the artificial intelligence (AI) literature, and this article adopts this terminology. Informally speaking, BIPC first identifies this backdoor using a reference instance and then develops ML models to predict their values. BIPC 

then solves an optimization problem to complete this partial solution. More precisely, BIPC consists of three phases: (I) backdoor identification, (II) prediction, and 8Figure 1: The BIPC Framework. (III) completion and correction. The identification phase tries to discover the backdoor B, which is partitioned into two sets: Bf and Bb. The prediction phase builds ML models that predict, for an instance P, the values of the variables from Bf in the optimal solution ϕ(P) and intervals for the variables from Bb which contain the optimal solution. The completion and correction phase uses the ML models and solves a reduced optimization problem where the variables in Bf are fixed to their predicted values and the variables in Bb are constrained to be within their predicted intervals. This reduced problem can be infeasible and suboptimal, in which this phase applies corrections to the predictions until the problem becomes feasible and satisfies the optimality tolerance. Importantly, phases I and II are performed offline using the distribution D (training time), while phase III is executed online for new instances (inference time). The rest of this section goes into more details of each of these phases. A visual description of BIPC is given in Figure 1. 9Backdoor Identification. The identification phase aims at finding the backdoor B. BIPC as-sumes the availability of a reference instance Pr and that the backdoor remains essentially the same for all instances of distribution D. This assumption is motivated by many practical optimization set-tings in which the same class of strategic decisions repeatedly drives computational complexity, even as the instance data changes over time. For example, in facility-location problems, facility-opening variables often determine the overall structure of the solution. In production planning, production quantities across products and periods typically drive most operational decisions. In network design problems, arc activation or flow variables frequently dominate the combinatorial complexity. As a result, while parameter values may vary from one instance to another, the variable family acting as the backdoor often remains unchanged. Under this assumption, the backdoor identified from the reference instance can be used throughout the learning and optimization phases. The identification phase first partitions the set of variables I into {I 1, . . . , Im} based on the structure of ϕ. It then solves the reference instance ϕ(Pr) to obtain a reference solution xr. The goal of the identification phase is to determine which subset Ik is a potential backdoor. To identify this subset, BIPC solves m reduced optimization problems, one for each subset. The optimization problem associated with subset Ik (1 ≤ k ≤ m) is the instance ϕ(Pr) where each variable xj in Ik

is fixed to its value in the reference solution xr, i.e., xj = xrj . Since the objective of BIPC is to accelerate optimization, the subset for which an optimal solution is found the fastest is considered the backdoor. The pseudo-code of the backdoor identification is given in Algorithm 1. It uses a function ϕ(P, S ) which returns a pair (x∗, t ∗) where x∗ is an optimal solution to instance P with additional constraints S and t∗ is the computation time of the optimization. 

The Learning Phase. Given a backdoor B, the learning phase starts by partitioning its variables into Bf and Bb. It then learns two ML models Mf and Mb for Bf and Bb respectively. Mf learns the mapping ϕ but only for the variables in Bf . Mb learns to predict intervals for the variables in 

Bb which contain the optimal solutions for a given instance. Mb is a classification problem where the domains of the variables in Bb have been partitioned into a set of intervals. 

Completion and Correction. At inference time, given a new instance P, BIPC uses Mf and 

Mb to predict the values and intervals for Bf and Bb in the optimal solution ϕ(P). For instance P,10 Algorithm 1: Phase I: The Backdoor Identification Procedure. 

Input: ϕ, Pr, {I 1, ..., Im} 

> 1

t∗ = ∞ 

> 2

xr = ϕ(Pr) 

> 3

for i ∈ { 1, ..., m } do  

> 4

S = {xk = xrk | k ∈ I i} 

> 5

(xi, t i) = ϕ(Pr, S ) 

> 6

if ti < t ∗ then  

> 7

t∗ = ti 

> 8

i∗ = i 

> 9

end  

> 10

end  

> 11

return Ii∗

BIPC then solves the reduced optimization problem 

ϕ(P, {xk = ˆ xk(P) | k ∈ B f } ∪ { xk ∈ ˆDk(P)| k ∈ B b})

which fixes each variable xk in Bf to its predicted value ˆxk(P) and constrains each variable xk in Bb

to be in its predicted intervals ˆDk(P). This reduced problem may be infeasible or suboptimal, in which case a correction phase is applied. The correction selectively relaxes a subset of variables in 

B, restoring feasibility while preserving as much of the predictions as possible. Variables in Bf are relaxed by removing their assigned values. Variables in Bb are relaxed by enlarging their intervals. Since the design of the ML models and correction mechanisms is problem-dependent, the next section focuses on the taxonomy and methodology used in the BIPC framework to specify the modeling choices, feature design, and algorithmic strategies used for the three phases across different problem classes. 

# 4 Taxonomy and Methodology 

Before detailing the methodology for predicting and correcting the backdoor, this section introduces a conceptual taxonomy that organizes model and strategy types. The taxonomy highlights the key factors underlying the design space of Phases II and III, providing a systematic basis for selecting appropriate ML models and correction mechanisms within the BIPC framework. The section presents the taxonomy first before outlining the methodology for designing the ML models and 11 correction mechanisms. 

4.1 Taxonomy of Models and Strategies 

To systematically address the diversity of problem instances and guide the design of Phases II and III, the BIPC taxonomy classifies instances along three dimensions: problem size , variable type , and 

feature type (see Figure 2). 

Problem Size. This captures the scale of the problems which are divided into two classes: 

• Medium-Scale ( P1): Problems with a moderate number of variables, i.e., problems that can be handled effectively by a single predictive model. 

• Large-Scale ( P2): Problems with a very large number of variables, i.e., problems whose scale motivates variable-wise prediction to improve scalability. 

Variable Type. This captures the nature of backdoor variables, which are divided into two classes: 

• Bounded-Range ( V1): binary and integer variables with a limited domain. 

• Wide-Range ( V2): Integer variables with large domains. 

Feature Type. This captures the choice of input features, which are divided into two classes: 

• Without Domain-Specific Features ( F1): Models only rely on generic instance data, such as the constraint matrix, objective coefficients, relaxation objective, etc. 

• With Domain-Specific Features ( F2): Models augment generic instance features with addi-tional features informed by domain knowledge. This taxonomy provides a structured framework for mapping problem characteristics to ML models and correction strategies, allowing for systematic design choices in Phases II and III. The next subsection discusses the methodology for constructing, training, and applying the ML models, as well as the associated correction mechanisms, based on this taxonomy. 

4.2 Methodology for Phases II and III 

Building on the taxonomy above, the methodology for constructing and applying the ML model (Phase II) and the correction mechanism (Phase III) is guided by problem size, variable type, and 12 V1

> V2
> P1
> P2
> F1
> F2

Variable Type Problem Size 

> Feature Type

Figure 2: Visualization of the BIPC framework taxonomy across three dimensions: variable type (V1, V2), problem size ( P1, P2), and feature type ( F1, F2). Each colored cube corresponds to a distinct configuration of the taxonomy. 

ID Color Code Architecture Type Feature Correction 

1 Orange P 1V 1F 1 G V P GF SR 

2 Gray P 1V 1F 2 G V P CF SR 

3 Yellow P 1V 2F 1 G V P &IP GF SR &BA 

4 Pink P 1V 2F 2 G V P &IP CF SR &BA 

5 Blue P 2V 1F 1 V W V P GF SR 

6 Green P 2V 1F 2 V W V P CF SR 

7 Red P 2V 2F 1 V W V P &IP GF SR &BA 

8 Purple P 2V 2F 2 V W V P &IP CF SR &BA 

Table 4.1: Mapping of colored cubes in Figure 2 to Phases II and III settings. Phase II includes ML model architecture, type, and features. Phase III indicates the correction strategy. feature type. The following summary outlines the general approach, highlighting how these three dimensions influence the choice of the strategies. The choices are summarized in Table 4.1. 

ML Architecture. The design of the ML models depends on the problem size: 

• Global Model ( G): For medium-scale problems ( P1), a single model predicts all variables simultaneously, ensuring consistency across variable interactions. 

• Variable-wise Model ( V W ): For large-scale problems ( P2), a separate model per variable captures individual variable behaviors, allowing scalability and specialized architectures at the cost of losing variable interactions. 

Model Type. The treatment of backdoor variables depends on whether they are small or large 13 domains: 

• Value Prediction ( V P ): For problems of type V1, predicting values is the selected method. Predicted values are fixed in the reduced problem, and Phase III handles any resulting feasi-bility issues. 

• Interval Prediction ( IP ): For problems of type V2, in addition to classifying whether a variable is zero versus non-zero, the ML model predicts an interval for the value of each variable when it is non-zero. Rather than estimating exact values, the method learns data-driven bounds that restrict the domain of non-zero variables in the reduced problem. Phase III then selectively relaxes these intervals, if needed, to restore feasibility and maintain solution quality. 

ML Model Features. Input features influence model accuracy and robustness: 

• Generic-Feature Model ( GF ): Models use only standard instance data, such as constraint matrices or objective coefficients. 

• Customized-Feature Model ( CF ): Models combine generic features with additional problem-specific information, such as structural properties, aggregated metrics, or historical solution patterns. 

Correction Mechanism. Phase III ensures robustness regardless of ML model design using the following strategies: 

• Selective Relaxation ( SR ): Only the subset of predicted variables causing infeasibility or large optimality gaps is relaxed, preserving the learning model structure as much as possible. 

• Bound Adjustment ( BA ): For wide-range integer variables, the predicted intervals may be progressively adjusted by expanding their lower and upper bounds, e.g., by incorporating adjacent intervals, to restore feasibility while keeping predictions informative. Phase III of BIPC focuses only on corrections that act on variable values and their bounds, as these are the only objects predicted in Phase II. This design ensures methodological alignment and preserves a clear interpretation of the ML model as defining a reduced optimization problem. Many real-world large-scale optimization problems are sparse, with most backdoors equal to zero at optimality. In such cases, the primary challenge is correctly identifying the non-zero variables, 14 as wrong predictions on zero-valued variables typically have limited impact. Accordingly, Phase III corrections focus on wrongly predicted non-zeros, i.e., either by relaxing incorrectly fixed variables or adjusting their bounds, while largely preserving the ML structure for zero-valued variables. The proposed methodology enables BIPC to efficiently predict and correct backdoor variables across diverse parametric mixed-integer optimization problems. The taxonomy in Section 4.1 guides these design decisions and maps them to the colored cubes in Figure 2, providing a clear reference for Phases II and III. 

# 5 The ML Models 

This section discusses the learning task, supervised learning, and the reduced MIP problem. The ML models use a set of labeled instances {(Pk, ϕ (Pk)) }Kk=1 drawn from distribution D.

5.1 Variables with Bounded Domains 

BIPC uses supervised learning with a cross-entropy loss to predict the values of variables in Bf .Given a domain Di for variable xi and an instance P, model Mf returns a (softmax) probability distribution Mf (P, x i) over Di. The loss function for variable xi and instance P is given by 

Lfi (P) = − X

> v∈Di

1{ϕ(P)i = v} log( Mf (P, x i)v)

5.2 Variables with Large Domains 

For variables in Bb with large domains, BIPC uses two ML models: M0 

> b

and MIb . Model M0 

> b

is a binary classifier that determines whether a variable in Bb is zero. Model M0 

> b

also uses a cross-entropy loss for each variable xi, i.e., 

Lbi (P) = − X

> v∈{ 0,1}

1{ψ(P)i = v} log( M0 

> b

(P, x i)v)

where 

ψ(P)i := 



0, if ϕ(P)i = 0 ,

1, otherwise .

15 Model MIb predicts an interval (or domain) for each of the variables in Bb that are not predicted to be zero in the optimal solution of an instance. BIPC partitions the domain Di of each variable 

xi ∈ B b into a set of intervals, i.e., Ii = {[l1 

> i

, u 1 

> i

], . . . , [lpi , u pi ]}. Given a domain Di for variable xi and an instance P, model MIb returns a (softmax) probability distribution over Ii, where MIb (P, x i)j

denotes the probability that optimal solution ϕ(P)i lies in [lji , u ji ]. Again, model MIb is trained with a cross-entropy loss, i.e., 

LIi (P) = −

> p

X

> j=1

1{ϕ(P)i ∈ [lji , u ji ]} log( MIb (P, x i)j )

5.3 Architecture 

The deep neural net (DNN) architectures used for both classification and interval prediction are designed with problem size in mind. For medium-scale problems ( P1) with a moderate number of backdoor variables, a single global model predicts all variables simultaneously, capturing dependen-cies and interactions across variables, while remaining computationally efficient. In contrast, for large-scale problems ( P2) with many backdoor variables, a separate model is trained for each vari-able. This approach enables scalability and the use of specialized architectures or hyperparameters for each variable, which is particularly useful when variables differ in sparsity patterns or range. In addition to problem size, the choice of input features influences model design. All DNNs can be trained using only generic instance-level data, such as the constraint matrix A and objective coefficients c. When available, domain-specific features can be incorporated to improve predictive accuracy, reducing dependencies on Phase III corrections. This design ensures that the architecture is flexible and consistent across value and interval prediction tasks in Phase II. These predictions, whether obtained from global or variable-wise DNNs and based on generic or customized features, define the reduced optimization problem solved in Phase III and therefore constitute the interface between learning and optimization in the BIPC framework. 16 6 The Reduced MIP Model and the Completion Phase 

At inference time, BIPC predicts the value ˆxi(P) of variable xi in Bf for an instance P by selecting the most likely value, i.e., 

ˆxi(P) ∈ argmax 

> v∈Di

Mf (P, x i)v.

BIPC fixes these variables to their predicted value in the reduced optimization problem. For variable 

xi in Bb and instance P, BIPC first predicts whether the variable is zero in the optimal solution of 

P, i.e., 

ˆzi(P) ∈ argmax 

> v∈{ 0,1}

M0 

> b

(P, x i)v.

If ˆzi(P) = 0 , variable xi is fixed to zero in the reduced optimization problem. Otherwise, BIPC 

selects the most likely interval for variable xi, i.e., 

bdi(P) ∈ argmax 

> j∈{ 1,...,p }

MIb (P, x i)j .

Variable xi is constrained to be in [lji , u ji ], with j = bdi(P) in the reduced optimization problem. The initial reduced optimization problem of BIPC is depicted in Figure 3: it uses the predictions listed above to constrain the backdoor variables. All other variables remain free and constrained within their initial domains. Solving ϕr(P) yields a completed solution ¯x, which may subsequently be corrected in case of infeasibility or significant sub-optimality. The reduced optimization problem is the core mechanism through which BIPC combines learning and optimization: the ML models restrict the search space through backdoor predictions, while optimization completes the remaining decisions and preserves feasibility. 

# 7 The Correction Phase 

Phase II typically yields reduced MIP problems whose solutions are feasible and near-optimal (Akhlaghi et al., 2025). Nevertheless, in some instances, fixing or bounding the backdoor variables can produce infeasible solutions or larger-than-desired optimality gaps. To address this, Phase III introduces a correction mechanism that selectively relaxes or adjusts variable bounds. This ensures 17 ϕr(P) = argmin 

> x

c⊤x

s.t. Ax ≤ b,xi = ˆ xi(P), ∀i ∈ B f ,xi = 0 ∀i ∈ B b : ˆ zi(P) = 0 

lji ≤ xi ≤ uji , ∀i ∈ B b, j = bdi(P)

xi ∈ Z, ∀i ∈ I ,xi ∈ R, ∀i / ∈ I ,

Figure 3: The Core Reduced Optimization Problem of BIPC .feasibility and improves solution quality, while preserving the structural guidance provided by Phase II. This section discusses how to relax subsets of fixed variables and adjust their intervals. 

7.1 Selective Relaxation 

Selective relaxation targets a subset of variables initially fixed by the ML model, but they are likely causing infeasibility or suboptimality. Define Uf (P) ⊆ B as the subset selected for relaxation. The selectively relaxed problem is then 

ϕsr (P) = argmin 

> x

c⊤x

s.t. Ax ≤ b,xi = ˆ xi(P), ∀i ∈ B f \ U f (P),xi = 0 ∀i ∈ B b \ U f (P) : ˆ zi(P) = 0 

lji ≤ xi ≤ uji , ∀i ∈ B b, j = bdi(P)

xi ∈ Z, ∀i ∈ I ,xi ∈ R, ∀i / ∈ I ,

Techniques for selecting Uf (P) include greedy heuristics based on infeasibility or constraint viola-tions, solver sensitivity analysis using dual or reduced-cost information, and ML models predicting which fixed variables are likely problematic. 18 7.2 Bound Adjustment 

For wide-range backdoor variables predicted as active (non-zero), the predicted intervals may be too restrictive. The bound adjustment procedure expands the intervals for a subset Ub(P) of variables, while leaving the remaining variables unchanged. Let [˜lji , ˜uji ] denote the adjusted bounds for i ∈ U b.The bound-adjusted problem is then 

ϕba (P) = argmin 

> x

c⊤x

s.t. Ax ≤ b,xi = ˆ xi(P), ∀i ∈ B f ,xi = 0 ∀i ∈ B b : ˆ zi(P) = 0 

lji ≤ xi ≤ uji , ∀i ∈ B b \ U b(P), j = bdi(P)˜lji ≤ xi ≤ ˜uji , ∀i ∈ U b(P), j = bdi(P)

xi ∈ Z, ∀i ∈ I ,xi ∈ R, ∀i / ∈ I ,

Common strategies for selecting Ub(P) and adjusting bounds include threshold-based relaxation using historical solution statistics, solver-guided iterative expansion until feasibility is achieved, and learning-based methods that predict effective bound expansions. If both selective relaxation and bound adjustment are applied, the resulting reduced problem incorporates both modifications simultaneously, with variables in Uf (P) relaxed and variables in 

Ub(P) having their bounds updated, yielding a combined correction model that preserves feasibility while leveraging the ML predictions. 

# 8 Experimental Design 

This section describes the general characteristics of the test instances, the computational setting, and implementation details. 19 8.1 Case Studies 

The first case study is drawn from the middle-mile consolidation network design problem (MMCNP). The MMCNP focuses on planning transportation capacity from vendors to fulfillment centers (FCs) and last-mile delivery (LMDs) centers, within required lead times. Shipments must be routed and consolidated into scheduled loads to ensure efficient delivery. The planner must decide which con-nections to operate, how much capacity to allocate, and how to group shipments so all demand is delivered on time. The hard setting includes 50 facilities, 2,000 paths, 400 arcs, and 300 commodi-ties, and the very-hard problem setting includes 200 facilities, 24,000 paths, 1,000 arcs, and 6,000 commodities. In the hard setting, instances are solved on average within 18 hours. In the very-hard setting, instances do not converge and exhibit an average gap of 5.12% after 24 hours, underscor-ing the difficulty of these models. Domain-specific features for the MMCNP case include: number of facilities (vendors, FCs, and LMDs), number of commodities to be transported, total demand volume aggregated over all commodities, number of direct transportation paths in the network, and the demand-to-capacity ratio defined as total demand divided by total available transportation capacity. Phase I reveals that the backdoor variables in the MMCNP case are the integer vari-ables that capture the number of trucks flowing on each arc. These variables span a small range. The reader is referred to the original paper for a detailed description of the model and industrial context (Greening et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024b). The second case is drawn from the strategic locomotive assignment problem (SLAP). The SLAP determines a weekly, repeatable plan for assigning locomotives to a fixed train schedule. The prob-lem specifies the required inputs, operational constraints, and cost components governing locomotive movements and work events such as pickups and set-outs. Its main outputs are the weekly loco-motive flows across the network and the event locations. These strategic decisions, including fleet sizing and event placement, provide the foundation for subsequent tactical and operational planning. The hard problem setting includes 1,000 nodes and 40,000 arcs, and the very-hard problem setting includes 8,000 nodes and 50,000 arcs. In the hard setting, instances reach optimality on average in five hours. In the very-hard setting, instances are more demanding and do not close the gap even after 24 hours, with an average gap of 0.03%. Domain-specific features for the SLAP include: the number of locomotives, the number of arcs, the number of trains, the length of the planning horizon 20 (number of periods), the total initial locomotive inventory, and the average number of locomotives per train. Phase I reveals that the backdoor variables in the SLAP case are the integer variables that capture the number of locomotives on each arc. These variables span a small range. The reader is referred to the original paper for a detailed description of the industrial context (Kim et al., 2025). The third case is drawn from a course scheduling problem (COURSE) at Cornell University. The COURSE determines an optimal assignment of university courses to discrete time blocks. The problem specifies the required inputs and operational constraints, such as block capacities and penalty components governing scheduling conflicts between co-enrolled courses. Its main outputs are the exact placements of courses into time slots. The hard problem setting includes 200 courses and 12 time slots, and the very-hard problem setting includes 400 courses and 14 time slots. As the number of courses increases, the density of conflict constraints grows significantly, making the resulting MIPs substantially more challenging to solve. Domain-specific features for the COURSE case include: number of courses, number of time slots, total number of conflict pairs (co-enrollments), average conflict degree per course, maximum conflict degree, total penalty weight aggregated over all conflicts, average penalty per conflict, and conflict density (ratio of realized conflicts to all possible course pairs). Phase I reveals that the backdoor variables are the binary variables indicating the assignment of each course to a specific time slot. Since each course must be placed into exactly one time slot out of all available options, all remaining assignment variables for that course are strictly zero. The reader is referred to the original paper for a detailed description of the industrial context (Ye et al., 2025a). The fourth case study (OCP) is the downstream supply chain of the OCP Group at the Jorf site in Morocco, one of the world’s largest phosphate-processing and export facilities. OCP is a large-scale mixed-integer linear programming model that integrates production, storage, and distribution decisions over a monthly planning horizon with daily resolution. The model captures the physical flow of materials across a highly interconnected network of conveyors, pipelines, storage units, and quays, while accounting for a rapidly expanding product portfolio and a demand-driven order fulfillment process. Key decisions include selecting shipments and loading schedules, developing daily production plans across multiple processing units, and determining implied inventory and changeover trajectories. The hard setting includes 61 vessels, a 32-day horizon (summer), and a 21 demand of around 1,066,290 tonnes, and the very-hard setting includes 58 vessels, a 30-day horizon (winter), and a demand of around 1,797,910 tonnes. In the hard setting, instances are solved on average within 1000 seconds. In the very-hard setting, instances do not converge and exhibit an average gap of 2% after 3 hours, underscoring the difficulty of these models. Domain-specific features for the OCP case include: number of vessels in the planning horizon, total demand volume (in tonnes) aggregated over all products and vessels, number of products considered in the instance, total available storage capacity across all storage units, average production capacity utilization (ratio of demand to nominal production capacity), and seasonal indicator (e.g., month or quarter of the year). Phase I reveals that the backdoor variables for the OCP case are the binary variables assigning the vessels to quays for loading over a specific period. A detailed description of the model and industrial context is available in (Er Raqabi et al., 2025b). The fifth case study considers a multi-period, multi-product order fulfillment problem (OFP) arising in distribution and warehousing operations. The planner must decide which customer orders to fulfill, how much to ship from each warehouse in each period, and when to activate warehouse facilities to maximize total profit, defined as revenues minus handling, transportation, and setup costs. The model incorporates inventory balance constraints, warehouse capacity limits, and order-specific delivery time windows, resulting in a large-scale mixed-integer linear program. The hard problem setting includes 80 periods, 100 orders, 6 locations, and 6 products, and the very-hard problem setting includes 100 periods, 200 orders, 10 locations, and 10 products. In the hard setting, instances are solved on average within 60 minutes. In the very-hard setting, instances are solved on average within 3 hours. Domain-specific features for the OFP include: the number of customer orders, the number of warehouse locations, the number of products, the length of the planning hori-zon (number of periods), the total initial inventory aggregated across all products and warehouses, and the average order time-window width measuring delivery flexibility. Phase I reveals that the backdoors for the OFP case are the integer variables that capture the quantities to produce for each product in each period and each facility. These variables span a large range. The reader is referred to the original paper for a detailed description of the model and industrial context (Ye et al., 2025b). Table 8.1 overviews instances in each setting for each case study and reports the number of constraints, the number of continuous variables, the number of binary variables, the number of 22 Problem Constraints Continuous Binary Integer Avg. Zeros MMCNP Hard 643 - 2,540 357 87% MMCNP Very-Hard 4,361 - 23,984 1,135 85% SLAP Hard 80,982 - 8 77,946 98% SLAP Very-Hard 82,996 - 20 77,032 95% COURSE Hard 30,173 - 43,488 173 95% COURSE Very-Hard 53,205 - 79,968 229 90% OCP Hard 772,383 925,502 11,155 - 96% OCP Very-Hard 370,827 435,536 15,237 - 92% OFP Hard 143,892 2,880 580 288,580 90% OFP Very-Hard 1,012,900 10,000 1,200 2,001,200 91% Table 8.1: Instances Taxonomy MMCNP SLAP COURSE OCP OFP Hard Very-Hard Hard Very-Hard Hard Very-Hard Hard Very-Hard Hard Very-Hard Problem Size P1 P1 P1 P1 P1 P1 P2 P2 P2 P2                                        

> Variable Type V1V1V1V1V1V1V1V1V2V2
> Feature Type F1/F2F1/F2F1/F2F1/F2F1/F2F1/F2F1/F2F1/F2F1/F2F1/F2

Table 8.2: Case Studies Classification based on the Taxonomy integer variables, and the average percentage of zero-valued backdoor variables in the optimal so-lution. These case studies are well-suited to evaluating the proposed BIPC framework, as they represent various cases discussed in the taxonomy as summarized in Table 8.2. Throughout this paper, problems with fewer than 100,000 backdoor variables are classified as medium-scale ( P1), whereas problems with at least 100,000 backdoor variables are classified as large-scale ( P2). This threshold was selected empirically based on the scalability of the learning models and serves as a guideline for choosing between global and variable-wise prediction architectures. 

8.2 Experimental Setting 

Data Generation. For each case study, training and test instances are constructed from two reference problem instances that represent different levels of difficulty, referred to as hard and very-hard . These reference instances are obtained from realistic operational data settings and serve as representative baselines for the underlying optimization problems. Throughout the experiments, all generated instances preserve the structural formulation of the reference problem, while demand parameters are perturbed to create diverse operational scenarios following a procedure inspired by Akhlaghi et al. (2025). Demand uncertainty in real-world optimiza-23 tion problems typically exhibits both positive correlations, driven by factors such as seasonality and market trends, and negative correlations arising from substitution effects or resource competition. The data generation process aims at capturing these characteristics while maintaining consistency with observed operational patterns. The perturbed datasets reflect realistic operational variability and produce integer variables with diverse activation patterns and wide value ranges, making them well-suited for evaluating the learning and correction components of the BIPC framework. 

Computational Setting. For each case study, a total of 600 MIP instances were generated following the procedure described above. These instances were split into 400 training instances, 100 validation instances, and 100 testing instances. The training set was used to fit the supervised learning models during Phase II, the validation set was used for hyperparameter tuning and model selection, and the testing set was reserved exclusively for performance evaluation. The DNNs used for both classification and interval prediction in Phase II are fully connected multilayer perceptrons with ReLU activation functions. Hyperparameters were selected via grid search over learning rates {0.001 , 0.005 }, number of hidden layers {3, 4}, and hidden layer dimensions 

{32 , 64 , 128 }. The number of instance-level and variable-level features used determines the input dimension of each network. All models were trained for 100 epochs with a batch size of 32 using the Adam optimizer. Model selection was performed based on validation performance, and final results are reported on held-out test sets. Classification models were evaluated using standard metrics such as F1 score and confusion matri-ces, while interval prediction models were assessed using classification accuracy over the predicted buckets. For medium-scale problems ( P1), a single global model was trained for both classifica-tion and interval prediction tasks. In contrast, for large-scale problems ( P2), separate variable-wise models were trained for each backdoor variable. All learning models were implemented in Python using PyTorch. Experiments were conducted using Gurobi Optimizer version 13.0.0. All optimization runs were executed on a machine equipped with an Intel ® Core TM i7–8700 processor operating at 3.20 GHz, with 64 GiB of system memory, running Oracle Linux Server release 7.7. The reduced and corrected MIP models were solved using 32 CPU threads. The termination 24 criterion was defined by setting the Gurobi parameter MIPGap to 0.5%, and MIPFocus was set to 1 to encourage rapid identification of high-quality feasible solutions. All reported runtimes correspond to real (wall-clock) time. Unless otherwise stated, all reported objective values correspond to the best feasible solution returned by the solver within the allotted time limit. 

Metrics. It is worth highlighting that strong predictive accuracy does not necessarily translate into high-quality optimization decisions (Elmachtoub et al., 2020). Accordingly, the evaluation focuses exclusively on the quality of solutions obtained by solving the reduced and corrected MIP models produced by the BIPC framework, rather than on standalone ML performance metrics. Solution quality is measured using two standard optimization metrics. The primal gap (PG) is defined as the relative difference between the objective value of the best feasible solution found by a method and the best known bound, evaluated at termination. This metric captures the final solution quality achieved within the computational budget. Formally, let zprimal (t) denote the objective value of the best feasible solution found up to time t, and let zbound (t) denote the best available dual bound at time t. At termination time T , the primal gap is defined as PrimalGap (T ) := zprimal (T ) − zbound (T )

max {| zprimal (T )|, ϵ } ,

where ϵ > 0 is a small constant introduced to avoid division by zero. In addition, the results report the primal integral (PI), which measures the time-integrated primal gap over the entire solve horizon, thereby accounting for both solution quality and the speed at which high-quality feasible solutions are identified. Together, these metrics provide a comprehensive assessment of the decision-making effectiveness of the BIPC framework, capturing not only the quality of final solutions but also the temporal behavior of the optimization process relative to the baseline. Formally: PrimalIntegral (T ) := 

Z T

> 0

zprimal (t) − zbound (t)

max {| zprimal (t)|, ϵ } dt. 

Comparison. The BIPC framework is benchmarked against state-of-the-art solution approaches to assess its ability to deliver high-quality solutions under limited computational budgets. This com-parison highlights the trade-off between solution quality and runtime and illustrates how learning-25 augmented optimization can outperform conventional solvers on large-scale and computationally challenging instances. The considered methods are: 

• MIP: Directly solving the full model using a state-of-the-art MIP solver, i.e., Gurobi with default parameter settings. 

• PROPEL : The learning-augmented optimization framework proposed in Akhlaghi et al. (2025). 

• ID-PaS+ : The identity aware predict-and-search introduced in Cai et al. (2025). All methods are evaluated under a runtime limit of 600 seconds over the five cases: OCP, MMCNP, OFP, SLAP, and COURSE. For each time budget, solution quality is assessed using the PG at termination and the PI over the entire solve horizon, thereby jointly evaluating final solution quality and the speed at which high-quality feasible solutions are obtained. ID-PaS+ does not apply to OFP because its methodology is restricted to bounded-domain variables and does not support the wide-range integer variables present in OFP. 

# 9 Computational Results 

This section evaluates the computational effectiveness of the proposed BIPC framework through an extensive experimental study. First, the BIPC performance is assessed relative to state-of-the-art approaches. Then, the computational performance of each BIPC phase is quantified. Last, several managerial insights relevant to large-scale decision-making contexts are highlighted. The detailed backdoor identification (Phase 1) is provided in Appendix A. 

9.1 Comparison with State-of-Art 

Table 9.1 shows the PG and PI averaged over 100 test instances for each benchmark, and reports the mean, standard deviation, and the number of instances each method wins. The best-performing entries are highlighted in bold for clarity. Across all problem families and difficulty levels, BIPC consistently achieves the lowest mean PG and PI, often by a substantial margin. In the very-hard settings, the improvement is particularly pronounced. For example, in OCP Very-Hard, BIPC reduces the mean PG from 1.72 and 1.98 26 Problem Method PG (%) ↓ PI ↓

Mean Std Dev Wins Mean Std Dev Wins MMCNP Hard MIP 0.16 0.25 10 3.30 3.28 0

PROPEL 0.09 0.15 12 2.12 2.22 6

ID-PaS+ 0.07 0.17 18 1.94 1.99 10 

BIPC 0.05 0.10 60 0.51 1.45 84 

MMCNP Very-Hard MIP 1.05 0.49 2 35.11 5.91 0

PROPEL 0.15 0.27 14 12.33 2.45 9

ID-PaS+ 0.12 0.23 14 11.27 2.67 9

BIPC 0.04 0.08 70 2.70 0.67 82 

SLAP Hard MIP 0.049 0.054 9 1.36 0.59 0

PROPEL 0.028 0.041 10 1.07 0.25 8

ID-PaS+ 0.024 0.032 13 1.16 0.43 7

BIPC 0.011 0.014 68 0.42 0.16 85 

SLAP Very-Hard MIP 0.18 0.21 7 7.85 2.12 0

PROPEL 0.15 0.33 6 6.12 1.18 10 

ID-PaS+ 0.13 0.15 11 5.36 1.55 10 

BIPC 0.08 0.07 76 1.24 0.44 80 

COURSE Hard MIP 0.023 0.010 2 1.97 1.78 1

PROPEL 0.013 0.008 18 1.90 1.59 3

ID-PaS+ 0.004 0.003 25 1.75 1.71 5

BIPC 0.004 0.002 55 1.43 1.55 91 

COURSE Very-Hard MIP 0.26 0.44 3 9.87 6.35 0

PROPEL 0.13 0.31 6 9.14 5.03 3

ID-PaS+ 0.07 0.23 31 7.61 4.56 10 

BIPC 0.05 0.11 60 6.76 4.22 87 

OCP Hard MIP 0.09 0.42 0 44.53 8.33 0

PROPEL 0.08 0.13 15 11.72 2.97 7

ID-PaS+ 0.08 0.08 20 11.13 3.11 8

BIPC 0.07 0.05 65 3.21 1.56 85 

OCP Very-Hard MIP 2.61 0.78 3 41.78 6.41 2

PROPEL 1.72 0.23 16 9.94 3.42 10 

ID-PaS+ 1.98 0.15 10 9.28 3.55 8

BIPC 0.80 0.03 71 3.79 1.22 80 

OFP Hard MIP 0.30 0.41 4 4.71 1.32 0

PROPEL 0.20 0.31 15 3.12 0.75 5

ID-PaS+ - - - - - -

BIPC 0.09 0.05 81 0.79 0.27 95 

OFP Very-Hard MIP 1.14 0.25 3 8.11 1.12 0

PROPEL 0.78 0.45 18 4.44 1.02 12 

ID-PaS+ - - - - - -

BIPC 0.13 0.08 79 1.16 0.25 88 

Table 9.1: Performance comparison of baseline and proposed methods across benchmark instances in terms of PG and PI. Results are reported as mean, standard deviation, and number of best-performing instances (Wins) over 100 instances per benchmark. Lower values indicate better per-formance. 27 for PROPEL and ID-PaS+ , and 2.61 for MIP, to 0.80, while simultaneously decreasing the PI to 3.79 compared to values between 9 and 42 for competing methods. This demonstrates that BIPC 

improves both final solution quality and the speed at which high-quality incumbents are identified. In hard settings, all learning-based methods remain competitive, yet BIPC still achieves the smallest PG and PI, and exhibits lower variability. This indicates not only improved solution quality but also greater stability across instances. The reduction in PI is especially notable, showing that BIPC 

consistently identifies strong feasible solutions early in the search process. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test ( p < 0.01 ) (Woolson, 2007) confirms that all reported performance differences between BIPC 

and the baselines are statistically significant, validating the robustness of the observed improvements across the various cases. From an algorithmic perspective, the distinction between predicting zeros among all integer vari-ables and predicting both zeros and non-zeros on a selected subset of backdoor variables reflects two fundamentally different mechanisms for reducing combinatorial complexity. Predicting zeros across the full set of integer variables, as done in PROPEL and ID-PaS+ , follows a conservative pruning strategy. By identifying likely inactive variables, this strategy reduces the search space while pre-serving flexibility. The solver determines the remaining assignments. This strategy exploits sparsity, which is common in many integer programs, and can substantially reduce the feasible region when zero predictions are accurate. However, it provides limited structural guidance, since the solver must still determine which of the remaining variables should take positive values. In contrast, predicting both zeros and non-zeros on a targeted subset of backdoor variables, as in 

BIPC , directly addresses the structural drivers of difficulty. Rather than distributing predictions across the entire integer space, this strategy concentrates on variables that encode the core combi-natorial decisions. By fixing both inactive and active assignments within this subset, the method not only prunes the search space but also shapes it, thereby reducing the effective combinatorial burden faced by the solver. The performance trends in Table 9.1 align with this intuition. As instance difficulty increases, the advantage of BIPC becomes more pronounced in both PG and PI. This pattern suggests that when complexity is driven by a relatively small number of structural decisions, accurately predicting their values yields stronger simplification than broadly predicting zeros across all integer variables. 28 In easier instances, where sparsity alone may already provide sufficient reduction, the PG between strategies is smaller, consistent with the more moderate differences observed in the table. Overall, the relative gains of BIPC increase with problem hardness, indicating that ML and structured parameter selection provide increasingly effective guidance in large and complex search spaces. 

9.2 Computational Performance of BIPC 

BIPC Performance on Instances solved to a PG below 0.05%. Figure 4 shows the PG over time, averaged over 100 test instances on each benchmark for each of the four methods. The figure reports the evolution of the PG (in %) over time (0–1000 seconds) on a logarithmic scale for eight instances across five problem classes (MMCNP, SLAP, COURSE, OCP, and OFP), each in Hard and Very-Hard variants. Each subfigure compares the four methods by tracking the rate and magnitude of reduction in the PG. Across almost all instances, BIPC exhibits a markedly faster initial reduction in the PG. In several cases (e.g., OCP Hard, MMCNP Hard, SLAP Hard), BIPC reaches sub-1% PGs within the first 100–200 seconds and often stabilizes near 0.01–0.1% well before 600 seconds. This early dominance indicates that BIPC is particularly effective at rapidly constructing high-quality feasible solutions. In contrast, MIP (Gurobi) typically reduces the PG more gradually, with a noticeable delay before reaching the same low-PG regime. PROPEL and ID-PaS+ consistently outperform the vanilla MIP baseline in the intermediate time window (roughly 100–400 seconds), often reducing the PG substantially earlier and sometimes matching BIPC in final solution quality, though typically not in early speed. The performance differences become more pronounced on the Very-Hard instances. For OCP Very-Hard and OFP Very-Hard, MIP and even PROPEL and ID-PaS+ tend to plateau at non-negligible PGs. At the same time, BIPC continues to significantly reduce the PG, particularly in the mid-to-late runtime regime. A similar pattern is observed in MMCNP and SLAP instances, where PROPEL and ID-PaS+ consistently improve upon MIP but are slightly less aggressive in early convergence than BIPC . Overall, the graphs suggest a clear hierarchy: BIPC dominates in early feasible-solution quality and often in final PG, PROPEL and ID-PaS+ provide stable improvements over MIP, and the baseline MIP solver exhibits the slowest PG closure, particularly 29 Problem Instances MIP Completion Correction 1 Correction 2 Correction 3 Correction 4 MMCNP Hard 21 0.41 0.15 0.11 0.07 0.07 0.07 MMCNP Very-Hard 19 1.54 0.12 0.08 0.06 0.06 0.06 SLAP Hard - 0.10 0.03 - - - -SLAP Very-Hard 16 0.39 0.15 0.11 0.07 0.07 0.07 COURSE Hard - 0.10 0.03 - - - -COURSE Very-Hard 16 0.39 0.15 0.11 0.07 0.07 0.07 OCP Hard 15 0.51 0.12 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 OCP Very-Hard 17 3.39 0.93 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.80 OFP Hard 24 0.71 0.14 0.10 0.07 0.07 -OFP Very-Hard 26 1.39 0.21 0.15 0.10 0.07 0.07 

Table 9.2: Evolution of PG across the proposed BIPC framework, including completion and cor-rections. Results are averaged over instances not solved within the desired threshold. as instance difficulty increases. 

BIPC Performance on Instances solved with PG higher than 0.05% or infeasible. 

Table 9.2 reports the decomposition of the method into its successive phases: the baseline MIP configuration, completion, and up to four Correction iterations (Phase III). For each problem class and difficulty level, the table shows the final PG after a fixed runtime budget, allowing a clear attribution of performance gains to each stage. The instances range from moderately difficult Hard cases to substantially more challenging Very-Hard cases, providing a consistent view of how the refinement mechanism behaves as complexity increases. The completion accounts for the majority of the improvement, while corrections primarily serve as a robustness mechanism that recovers from occasional prediction errors and further refines solu-tion quality. Across all problem classes, the PG decreases substantially from the baseline MIP to completion. For example, in OCP Very-Hard, the PG decreases from 3.39 to 0.93, and in MMCNP Very-Hard from 1.54 to 0.12. Similar patterns appear in OFP Very-Hard (1.39 to 0.21) and OCP Hard (0.51 to 0.12). This shows that most of the performance improvement is already captured by the completion, which is highly effective at identifying strong regions of the parameter space before any iterative correction is applied. The corrections then deliver systematic but diminishing improvements. The first one or two corrections typically produce the largest additional reductions, while later iterations provide finer 30 Problem                                                                                                

> F1F2
> PG (%) ↓PI ↓PG (%) ↓PI ↓
> Mean Std Dev Mean Std Dev Mean Std Dev Mean Std Dev MMCNP Hard 0.07 0.14 0.61 1.74 0.05 0.10 0.51 1.45
> MMCNP Very-Hard 0.056 0.112 3.24 0.80 0.04 0.08 2.70 0.67
> SLAP Hard 0.0154 0.0196 0.50 0.19 0.011 0.014 0.42 0.16
> SLAP Very-Hard 0.112 0.098 1.49 0.53 0.08 0.07 1.24 0.44
> COURSE Hard 0.008 0.002 1.77 2.01 0.004 0.002 1.43 1.55
> COURSE Very-Hard 0.07 0.23 7.12 4.63 0.05 0.11 6.76 4.22
> OCP Hard 0.098 0.07 3.85 1.87 0.07 0.05 3.21 1.56
> OCP Very-Hard 0.88 0.042 4.55 1.46 0.80 0.03 3.79 1.22
> OFP Hard 0.126 0.07 0.95 0.32 0.09 0.05 0.79 0.27
> OFP Very-Hard 0.182 0.112 1.39 0.30 0.13 0.08 1.16 0.25

Table 9.3: Impact of feature engineering on ML model performance. Comparison between the generic feature set F1 and the enriched feature set F2 in terms of PG and PI, reported as mean and standard deviation across instances. refinements. In OFP Very-Hard, the PG decreases from 0.21 to 0.07 over three corrections. In MMCNP Hard, the PG decreases from 0.15 to 0.07 within two corrections. In easier cases, such as SLAP Hard, the completion alone already yields a very small PG (0.03), making further cor-rections unnecessary. Overall, the table highlights a two-stage effect: the completion delivers the dominant improvement, while the correction iterations act as a controlled polishing mechanism that incrementally consolidates solution quality, especially on the most difficult instances. By progressively enabling the completion and correction mechanisms, supervised learning and targeted corrections jointly improve feasibility, optimality, and robustness across problem classes. 

Impact of Domain-specific Features. Table 9.3 evaluates the impact of the feature design used in the ML model. Two feature sets are compared: F1, which includes only generic instance features, and F2, which augments F1 with domain-specific features. For each problem class and difficulty level, the table reports the mean and standard deviation of two performance indicators: the PG and the PI. This allows assessment not only of average solution quality but also of robustness across instances. Across all problem classes and difficulty levels, F2 consistently outperforms F1 in terms of mean PG. The improvement is particularly pronounced on Very-Hard instances. For example, in OCP 31 Very-Hard, the mean PG decreases from 0.88 ( F1) to 0.80 ( F2), and in OFP Very-Hard from 0.182 to 0.13. Similar reductions are observed for MMCNP and SLAP variants. These results indicate that incorporating domain-specific structure enables the ML model to capture instance heterogeneity better and select more appropriate parameter configurations. The performance gains are systematic rather than isolated, as F2 dominates F1 in every row of the table. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test ( p < 0.01 ) (Woolson, 2007) confirms that all reported performance differences between domain-generic and domain-specific features in BIPC are statistically significant, validating the robustness of the observed improvements across the five case studies. The benefits of domain-specific features are more pronounced on the very-hard instances, suggesting that instance-specific structural information becomes increasingly valuable as combinatorial complexity grows. 

9.3 Managerial Insights 

The computational study reveals three consistent findings across all five application domains. First, each parametric MIP family exhibits a small computational backdoor whose fixation dramatically reduces solution effort, providing empirical evidence that a limited subset of variables drives most of the optimization complexity. Second, these backdoors are highly sparse, with the vast majority of backdoor variables taking value zero at optimality and only a small fraction of non-zero variables determining the key decisions. Third, fixing only the non-zero backdoor variables recovers most of the computational benefit obtained by fixing the entire backdoor, while fixing only the zero-valued variables yields substantially weaker improvements. These results suggest that the primary challenge in large-scale parametric mixed-integer optimization is not predicting all integer variables, but accurately identifying and predicting the small subset of non-zero backdoor variables that govern solution quality and computational performance. Collectively, these findings provide the empirical foundation for the BIPC framework and motivate its predict-complete-correct paradigm. These computational findings translate into actionable managerial insights. This section discusses how BIPC supports faster and more reliable decision-making, identifies critical variables driving complexity, and enables scalable planning in high-dimensional operational settings. 

Faster and more reliable decision support. Across all problem classes, BIPC consistently re-duces both the primal gap and the primal integral, indicating not only higher final solution quality 32 but also substantially faster convergence to high-quality feasible plans. From a managerial per-spective, this means that decision-makers can obtain strong, implementable solutions earlier within limited planning windows. In time-sensitive operational environments such as port operations, pro-duction planning, or logistics coordination, earlier access to high-quality plans directly translates into improved responsiveness, reduced operational risk, and greater confidence in execution. 

Focusing on what truly drives complexity. A central insight of BIPC is that not all decision variables contribute equally to computational difficulty. Rather than attempting to simplify the entire model uniformly, BIPC concentrates on a backdoor, i.e., a subset of structurally critical variables that drive combinatorial complexity. By accurately predicting both active and inactive values for backdoor variables, BIPC reshapes the search space around its most influential decisions. Managerially, this provides a clear message: complexity in large-scale planning problems is often concentrated in a small number of pivotal choices, such as assignment, sequencing, or allocation decisions. Identifying and structuring these key drivers enables disproportionate gains in solvability and performance. 

Scalable planning through feature-driven tuning. The effectiveness of BIPC relies on inter-pretable, domain-specific features that summarize instance characteristics such as demand intensity, resource capacity, structural size, and seasonality. These features serve as a compact representation of the operational environment and enable the model to adapt its parameter selection to the in-stance’s difficulty. Importantly, the framework is modular: if additional domain knowledge becomes available, new features can be incorporated without redesigning the optimization model itself. This flexibility enables organizations to refine performance as more operational data is collected over time. 

The Elephant and the Bee analogy. Conceptually, BIPC embodies a divide-and-focus phi-losophy. The large-scale optimization model is like an elephant: powerful, with generic features, but computationally intensive. The learning component with the domain-specific features acts as the bee: lightweight, adaptive, and capable of quickly identifying where attention should be di-rected. By guiding the solver toward structurally critical decisions rather than uniformly reducing the model, the approach balances robustness with efficiency. This synergy enables organizations to maintain rich, high-fidelity models while achieving tractable solution times, even as problem size 33 and dimensionality increase. Overall, the results suggest that data-informed variable prioritization can substantially enhance the scalability of advanced planning models. For managers, this means that complex, high-dimensional decision problems need not be simplified at the modeling stage to remain solvable. Instead, in-telligent guidance layered on top of detailed optimization models can deliver both realism and computational performance. 

# 10 Conclusion 

This paper introduced the BIPC framework for efficiently solving parametric mixed-integer op-timization problems by identifying backdoor variables that drive computational complexity and exploiting this structure through targeted prediction and correction. The framework consists of three phases: backdoor identification, which analyzes the impact of variable fixing to identify a backdoor; supervised learning, which predicts values or narrower domains for backdoor variables to produce a reduced problem that can be solved efficiently; and completion and correction, which re-store feasibility and improve solution quality when predictions are imperfect. To guide the design of Phases II and III, a taxonomy was proposed based on problem size, backdoor variable type, and fea-ture type, providing a systematic map for selecting appropriate modeling and correction strategies. The methodology leverages this taxonomy to handle binary and general integer variables, sparse and dense structures, and domain-specific features, thereby balancing computational efficiency with solution quality. Computational experiments on five large-scale applications demonstrated that the proposed frame-work consistently identifies meaningful and stable backdoors corresponding to the primary opera-tional decisions of each problem. The results show that combining prediction, completion, and correction can significantly improve solution quality relative to both classical optimization and ex-isting learning-augmented optimization approaches. In particular, the experiments highlight that much of the computational complexity of large-scale parametric MIPs is concentrated in a small subset of strategic variables, and that accurately predicting these variables can dramatically reduce the effective search space while preserving high-quality solutions. 34 More broadly, the results suggest that learning and optimization are particularly complemen-tary in repetitive decision-making environments where large numbers of related instances must be solved over time. By leveraging historical solutions to identify and predict the most influential decisions, BIPC transforms optimization from solving each instance independently to exploiting recurring structural patterns across instances. This perspective provides a scalable pathway for in-tegrating machine learning into mathematical optimization and establishes a foundation for future research on adaptive backdoor discovery, richer prediction models, and learning-enhanced optimiza-tion frameworks for large-scale industrial applications. The present work assumes that instances share a common structural formulation and differ primarily through parameter perturbations. Ex-tending BIPC to variable-size instances, where nodes, arcs, products, or constraints may be added or removed over time, constitutes an important direction for future research. Such extensions would require learning representations that generalize across varying optimization structures and could further broaden the applicability of learning-enhanced optimization in industrial settings. 

# Acknowledgments 

This research was partly supported by the NSF AI Institute for Advances in Optimization (Award 2112533). 

# References 

Akhlaghi, V. E., Zandehshahvar, R., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2025). Propel: Supervised and reinforcement learning for large-scale supply chain planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07383 .Alvarez, A. M., Louveaux, Q., and Wehenkel, L. (2017). A machine learning-based approximation of strong branching. INFORMS Journal on Computing , 29:185–195. Balcan, M.-F., Dick, T., Sandholm, T., and Vitercik, E. (2018). Learning to branch. In Dy, J. and Krause, A., editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 344–353. PMLR. Bengio, Y., Frejinger, E., Lodi, A., Patel, R., and Sankaranarayanan, S. (2020). A learning-based algorithm to quickly compute good primal solutions for stochastic integer programs. In Interna-tional conference on integration of constraint programming, artificial intelligence, and operations research , pages 99–111. Springer. Bengio, Y., Lodi, A., and Prouvost, A. (2021). Machine learning for combinatorial optimization: a methodological tour d’horizon. European Journal of Operational Research , 290:405–421. Cai, J., Er Raqabi, E. M., Van Hentenryck, P., and Dilkina, B. (2025). ID-PaS: Identity-aware predict-and-search for general mixed-integer linear programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10211 .35 Cai, J., Huang, T., and Dilkina, B. (2024). Learning backdoors for mixed integer linear programs with contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10467 .Cappart, Q., Moisan, T., Rousseau, L.-M., Prémont-Schwarz, I., and Cire, A. A. (2021). Combining reinforcement learning and constraint programming for combinatorial optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 35, pages 3677–3687. Chen, W., Tanneau, M., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2023). End-to-end feasible optimization proxies for large-scale economic dispatch. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 39:4723–4734. Chmiela, A., Khalil, E., Gleixner, A., Lodi, A., and Pokutta, S. (2021). Learning to schedule heuristics in branch and bound. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:24235– 24246. Detassis, F., Lombardi, M., and Milano, M. (2021). Teaching the old dog new tricks: Supervised learning with constraints. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 35, pages 3742–3749. Dilkina, B., Gomes, C. P., Malitsky, Y., Sabharwal, A., and Sellmann, M. (2009). Backdoors to combinatorial optimization: Feasibility and optimality. In International Conference on Integra-tion of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research , pages 56–70. Springer. Dilkina, B., Gomes, C. P., and Sabharwal, A. (2007). Tradeoffs in the complexity of backdoor detection. In International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming ,pages 256–270. Springer. Donti, P., Amos, B., and Kolter, J. Z. (2017). Task-based end-to-end model learning in stochastic optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30. Donti, P. L., Rolnick, D., and Kolter, J. Z. (2021). Dc3: A learning method for optimization with hard constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.12225 .El Balghiti, O., Elmachtoub, A. N., Grigas, P., and Tewari, A. (2019). Generalization bounds in the predict-then-optimize framework. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32. Elmachtoub, A. N. and Grigas, P. (2022). Smart “predict, then optimize”. Management Science ,68:9–26. Elmachtoub, A. N., Liang, J. C. N., and McNellis, R. (2020). Decision trees for decision-making under the predict-then-optimize framework. In International conference on machine learning ,pages 2858–2867. PMLR. Er Raqabi, E. M. (2024). Primal Methods for Very Large-Scale Optimization . PhD thesis, Poly-technique Montréal. Er Raqabi, E. M., Bani, A., Morabit, M., Massé, A. B., Besner, A., Fournier, J., and El Hallaoui, I. (2025a). A decomposition matheuristic for the transient stability constrained unit commitment at Hydro-Quebec. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems .Er Raqabi, E. M., Beljadid, A., Bennouna, M. A., Bennouna, R., Boussaadi, L., El Hachemi, N., El Hallaoui, I., Fender, M., Jamali, M. A., Si Hammou, N., and Soumis, F. (2025b). OCP optimizes its supply chain for Africa. INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics , 55(6):437–456. 36 Er Raqabi, E. M., Wu, Y., El Hallaoui, I., Soumis, F., et al. (2024). Towards resilience: Primal large-scale re-optimization. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review ,192:103819. Ferber, A., Wilder, B., Dilkina, B., and Tambe, M. (2020). Mipaal: Mixed integer program as a layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pages 1504– 1511. Fioretto, F., Mak, T. W., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2020). Predicting ac optimal power flows: Combining deep learning and lagrangian dual methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pages 630–637. Gasse, M., Chételat, D., Ferroni, N., Charlin, L., and Lodi, A. (2019). Exact combinatorial opti-mization with graph convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32. Gomes, C. P., Selman, B., Crato, N., and Kautz, H. (2000). Heavy-tailed phenomena in satisfiability and constraint satisfaction problems. Journal of automated reasoning , 24(1):67–100. Greening, L. M., Dahan, M., and Erera, A. L. (2023). Lead-time-constrained middle-mile con-solidation network design with fixed origins and destinations. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological , 174:102782. Guan, C., Er Raqabi, E. M., Tanneau, M., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2026). The proxy benders decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.07403 .Gupta, P., Gasse, M., Khalil, E., Mudigonda, P., Lodi, A., and Bengio, Y. (2020). Hybrid models for learning to branch. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:18087–18097. Han, Q., Yang, L., Chen, Q., Zhou, X., Zhang, D., Wang, A., Sun, R., and Luo, X. (2023). Agnn-guided predict-and-search framework for mixed-integer linear programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05636 .Huang, T., Ferber, A. M., Zharmagambetov, A., Tian, Y., and Dilkina, B. (2024a). Contrastive predict-and-search for mixed integer linear programs. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Huang, W. and Chen, M. (2021). Deepopf-ngt: Fast no ground truth deep learning-based approach for ac-opf problems. In ICML 2021 Workshop Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning .Huang, W., Huang, T., Ferber, A. M., and Dilkina, B. (2024b). Distributional MIPLIB: a multi-domain library for advancing ml-guided milp methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06954 .Khalil, E., Le Bodic, P., Song, L., Nemhauser, G., and Dilkina, B. (2016). Learning to branch in mixed integer programming. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 30. Khalil, E. B., Dilkina, B., Nemhauser, G. L., Ahmed, S., and Shao, Y. (2017). Learning to run heuristics in tree search. In Ijcai , volume 2017, pages 659–666. Khalil, E. B., Morris, C., and Lodi, A. (2022a). Mip-gnn: A data-driven framework for guiding combinatorial solvers. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pages 10219–10227. 37 Khalil, E. B., Vaezipoor, P., and Dilkina, B. (2022b). Finding backdoors to integer programs: a monte carlo tree search framework. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 36, pages 3786–3795. Kim, Y., Hijazi, A., Dalmeijer, K., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2025). Practice-based optimization for the strategic locomotive assignment problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.22235 .Kotary, J., Fioretto, F., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2022). Fast approximations for job shop scheduling: A lagrangian dual deep learning method. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pages 7239–7246. Kotary, J., Fioretto, F., Van Hentenryck, P., and Wilder, B. (2021). End-to-end constrained opti-mization learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16378 .Lodi, A. and Zarpellon, G. (2017). On learning and branching: a survey. Top , 25:207–236. Maragno, D., Wiberg, H., Bertsimas, D., Birbil, Ş. İ., den Hertog, D., and Fajemisin, A. O. (2025). Mixed-integer optimization with constraint learning. Operations Research , 73(2):1011–1028. Mohan, V., Er Raqabi, E. M., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2025). A fair or-ml framework for resource substitution in large-scale networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18269 .Moinuddin, A., Er Raqabi, E. M., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2026). Scheduling and routing in the flexible job shop with heterogeneous transbots and zoning: A constraint programming approach. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24483 .Morabit, M., Desaulniers, G., and Lodi, A. (2021). Machine-learning–based column selection for column generation. Transportation Science , 55(4):815–831. Ning, C. and You, F. (2019). Optimization under uncertainty in the era of big data and deep learning: When machine learning meets mathematical programming. Computers & Chemical Engineering , 125:434–448. Park, S., Chen, W., Han, D., Tanneau, M., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2023). Confidence-aware graph neural networks for learning reliability assessment commitments. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , 39:3839–3850. Park, S. and Van Hentenryck, P. (2023). Self-supervised primal-dual learning for constrained op-timization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 4052–4060. Sahinidis, N. V. (2004). Optimization under uncertainty: state-of-the-art and opportunities. Com-puters & chemical engineering , 28:971–983. Song, J., Yue, Y., Dilkina, B., et al. (2020). A general large neighborhood search framework for solving integer linear programs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:20012– 20023. Tang, K. and Yao, X. (2024). Learn to optimize—a brief overview. National Science Review ,11(8):nwae132. Tang, Y., Agrawal, S., and Faenza, Y. (2020). Reinforcement learning for integer programming: Learning to cut. In International conference on machine learning , pages 9367–9376. PMLR. 38 Tanneau, M. and Van Hentenryck, P. (2024). Dual lagrangian learning for conic optimization. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:55538–55561. Tran, C., Fioretto, F., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2021). Differentially private and fair deep learning: A lagrangian dual approach. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 35, pages 9932–9939. Van Hentenryck, P. and Dalmeijer, K. (2024). AI4OPT: AI institute for advances in optimization. 

AI Magazine , 45(1):42–47. Vesselinova, N., Steinert, R., Perez-Ramirez, D. F., and Boman, M. (2020). Learning combinatorial optimization on graphs: A survey with applications to networking. IEEE Access , 8:120388– 120416. Wilder, B., Dilkina, B., and Tambe, M. (2019). Melding the data-decisions pipeline: Decision-focused learning for combinatorial optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on arti-ficial intelligence , volume 33, pages 1658–1665. Williams, R., Gomes, C. P., and Selman, B. (2003). Backdoors to typical case complexity. In IJCAI ,volume 3, pages 1173–1178. Woolson, R. F. (2007). Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Wiley encyclopedia of clinical trials , pages 1–3. Ye, T., Deza, A., Mohan, V., Er Raqabi, E. M., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2026). Democratizing large-scale re-optimization with llm-guided model patches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.18692 .Ye, T., Jovine, A. S., Van Osselaer, W., Zhu, Q., and Shmoys, D. B. (2025a). Cornell University uses integer programming to optimize final exam scheduling. INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics .Ye, T., Tong, S., Guan, C., Basciftci, B., and Van Hentenryck, P. (2025b). Deep learning-driven contextual stochastic optimization for real-time order fulfillment. In NeurIPS 2025 Work-shop MLxOR: Mathematical Foundations and Operational Integration of Machine Learning for Uncertainty-Aware Decision-Making .Zarpellon, G., Jo, J., Lodi, A., and Bengio, Y. (2021). Parameterizing branch-and-bound search trees to learn branching policies. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 35, pages 3931–3939. 

# Appendix A Backdoor Identification 

Tables A.1 and A.2 report the Phase I exploratory analysis used to identify candidate backdoors for the hard and very-hard settings, respectively. For each application, several semantically meaningful variable families were fixed to their values in a reference optimal solution, and the resulting reduced MIP was solved. Consistent with the backdoor identification procedure described in Section 3, the family yielding the shortest runtime was selected as the backdoor. Interestingly, the selected 39 Problem Variable Family # Var Runtime (s) Gap (%) Selected 

MMCNDP x (flow variables) 2,183 0.001 0.000 ✓

y (facility variables) 357 0.004 0.163 SLAP 

x (assignment variables) 39,169 0.020 0.000 ✓

u (inventory variables) 38,769 0.039 0.466 

y (fleet variables) 8 50.744 0.410 COURSE 

x (course assignment variables) 20,736 0.031 0.000 ✓

y (scheduling variables) 1,728 0.050 0.000 

z (auxiliary variables) 20,736 1.477 0.000 

w (block variables) 300 0.061 0.000 

v (slot variables) 12 0.064 0.000 

o (three variables) 1 1.671 0.000 

r (B2B variables) 2 9.581 0.000 

l (triple variables) 2 100.021 3.681 OCP 

x (vessel assignment) 9,690 6.609 0.213 ✓

y (order fulfillment) 61 100.044 –

v (selected variables) 1,404 16.416 0.034 OFP 

x (allocation variables) 288,000 0.131 0.000 ✓

s (setup variables) 480 0.962 0.216 

a (activation variables) 100 1.820 0.360 

Table A.1: Phase I backdoor identification results for the Hard setting. For each application, candidate variable families were fixed to their values in a reference optimal solution, and the resulting reduced MIP was solved. Following the backdoor identification procedure of BIPC , the variable family yielding the shortest runtime was selected as the backdoor. backdoors correspond to the principal operational decision variables of each application (transporta-tion flows in MMCNDP, locomotive assignments in SLAP, course assignments in COURSE, vessel assignment in OCP, and order-allocation variables in OFP), providing empirical evidence that a relatively small subset of strategic decisions drives most of the computational complexity. Notably, the selected backdoor variables are also those with the largest cardinality in four of the five appli-cations, indicating that the most expressive operational decisions tend to capture the majority of the combinatorial structure of the problem. The results reveal substantial differences in the computational impact of the candidate variable families. In all five applications, the selected backdoor yields the smallest solution time, often by several orders of magnitude. These findings suggest that the computational complexity of the con-sidered parametric MIPs is concentrated in a relatively small subset of strategic decision variables, 40 Problem Variable Family # Var Runtime (s) Gap (%) Selected                                                                                           

> MMCNDP x(flow variables) 23,984 0.010 0.000 ✓
> y(facility variables) 1,135 100.010 –SLAP
> x(assignment variables) 39,916 0.022 0.000 ✓
> u(inventory variables) 37,116 0.094 0.000
> y(fleet variables) 20 100.037 0.537 COURSE
> x(course assignment variables) 38,416 0.050 0.000 ✓
> y(scheduling variables) 2,744 0.092 0.000
> z(auxiliary variables) 38,416 3.723 0.499
> w(block variables) 406 0.116 0.000
> v(slot variables) 14 0.121 0.000
> o(three variables) 14.034 0.000
> r(B2B variables) 221.685 0.000
> l(triple variables) 2100.017 6.455 OCP
> x(vessel assignment) 5,682 20.725 0.000 ✓
> y(order fulfillment) 38 55.202 0.000
> v(selected variables) 1,179 92.761 0.000
> w(production variables) 4,154 60.009 0.000
> o(changeover variables) 5,239 100.021 16.161 OFP
> x(allocation variables) 2,000,000 1.153 0.000 ✓
> a(activation variables) 200 11.706 0.454
> s(setup variables) 1,000 64.206 0.487

Table A.2: Phase I backdoor identification results for the Very-Hard setting. For each application, candidate variable families were fixed to their values in a reference optimal solution, and the resulting reduced MIP was solved. Following the backdoor identification procedure of BIPC , the variable family yielding the shortest runtime was selected as the backdoor. which motivates the prediction, completion, and correction mechanisms developed in Phases II and III. The results indicate that the same variable family is consistently identified as the backdoor across both Hard and Very-Hard instances for all five applications. This empirical observation provides strong support for the assumption made in Section 3 that the backdoor remains essentially stable across instances drawn from the same distribution. Moreover, the selected backdoors consistently correspond to the primary operational decision variables of each application, suggesting that the computational complexity of these parametric MIPs is concentrated in a small set of strategic decisions. Although the selected backdoor variables often correspond to the largest variable family in the 41 formulation, the exploratory analysis shows that cardinality alone is insufficient to explain compu-tational impact, as several large variable families produce significantly weaker reductions in solution time. 42 0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 1

Runtime (s)   

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> ID-PaS+ BIPC

(a) MMCNP Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 1

Runtime (s)   

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> ID-PaS+ BIPC

(b) MMCNP Very-Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 1

Runtime (s)   

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> ID-PaS+ BIPC

(c) SLAP Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 1

Runtime (s)   

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> ID-PaS+ BIPC

(d) SLAP Very-Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −2

10 0

10 2

Runtime (s)   

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> ID-PaS+ BIPC

(e) COURSE Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 1

Runtime (s)   

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> ID-PaS+ BIPC

(f) COURSE Very-Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 1

Runtime (s)   

> PG (%)  MIP PROPEL
> ID-PaS+ BIPC

(g) OCP Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 0

10 1

10 2

Runtime (s)   

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> ID-PaS+ BIPC

(h) OCP Very-Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 1

Runtime (s)  

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> BIPC

(i) OFP Hard 

0 200 400 600 800 1,000 

10 −1

10 1

Runtime (s)  

> PG (%)  Gurobi PROPEL
> BIPC

(j) OFP Very-Hard 

Figure 4: Average PG Evolution across Methods and Problem Instances. 43