Title: OptSkills: Learning Generalizable Optimization Skills from Problem Archetypes via Cluster-Based Distillation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.29829v1

Published Time: Fri, 29 May 2026 01:29:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
## OPT SKILLS : Learning Generalizable Optimization Skills from Problem Archetypes via Cluster-Based Distillation 

Haochen Yang 1*, Ke Zhao 1∗, Mengyuan Ma 1, Xingyu Lu 3,Xiangfeng Wang 1, Hong Qian 1,2 †

> 1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China 

> 2

Shanghai Innovation Institute, Shanghai, China 

> 3

Ant Group, China 

M0kou@outlook.com,{kezhao, 10222140418}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn ,

sing.lxy@antgroup.com,xfwang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn,hqian@cs.ecnu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) to automatically formulate and solve optimization problems from natural language has emerged as an efficient paradigm for automated optimization. However, existing methods still exhibit limited generalization: they are sensitive to superficial narrative variations, reuse experience mainly at the case level, and struggle to adapt to shifted or emerging problem types. We propose O PT SKILLS , an archetype-centric skill learning and reasoning agent system for optimization modeling and solving. To improve robust generalization, our system clusters problems by their underlying archetypes rather than surface narratives. To improve in-distribution generalization, it explores diverse modeling paradigms and solver configurations within each cluster, then distills successful trajectories into reusable workflow-level skills. To improve out-of-distribution generalization, it refines existing skills or expands the skill library using newly obtained trajectories. Our system achieves a state-of-the-art micro-averaged accuracy of 68.27% on datasets encompassing diverse problem types and scenarios. In addition, on MIPLIB-NL, a highly chal-lenging large-scale and high-dimensional benchmark, it achieves 26.91% accuracy, outperforming DeepSeek-V3.2-Thinking by 4.53%. After skill learning on Nano-CO, it reaches 72.79% on the OOD NLCO benchmark. Code and skills are available at https://github.com/fujiwaranoM0kou/OptSkills. 

1 Introduction 

The advancement of the industrial field brings the efficient solution of operational optimization prob-lems into sharp focus across academia and industry. However, the inherent complexity of optimization 

> *

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

> †

Corresponding author 

(a) Raw problem embedding. (b) Archetype embedding. Raw Archetype 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Hit@1
> 0.416
> 0.820

(c) Hit@1. Raw Archetype  

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> MAP@5
> 0.318
> 0.679

(d) MAP@5. 

Figure 1: Embedding-space comparison on N ANO -CO. Each point represents a problem instance, colored by manually verified problem-archetype labels. Top pan-els show t-SNE projections of raw problem-text em-beddings and archetype embeddings; bottom panels report nearest-neighbor retrieval results in Hit@1 and MAP@5. Details are provided in Appendix F.1. 

problems has necessitated reliance on domain ex-perts to formulate mathematical models and de-velop solver code, a process that is both costly and expertise-intensive. Large language models (LLMs) have recently been explored as a promis-ing tool for automating optimization modeling and solving. Existing studies have investigated multi-agent collaboration (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024; Xiao et al., 2024), supervised fine-tuning (SFT) (Jiang et al., 2025a; Huang et al., 2025a), and reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2026; Ding et al., 2026), achieving strong performance on stan-dard benchmarks. Recent studies have explored experience reuse for LLM-based optimization. AlphaOPT (Kong et al., 2026) constructs a self-evolving experience library that retrieves relevant experiences to guide similar problems, while LEAN-LLM-OPT (Liang et al., 2026) introduces a library of few-shot ex-

> arXiv:2605.29829v1 [cs.AI] 28 May 2026

amples to help LLM agents construct structured workflows. However, these agents still suffer from limited generalization ability. In practical scenar-ios, this limitation appears in three forms. First, 

robust generalization requires the agent to identify the same optimization structure under different nar-ratives, while avoiding sensitivity to superficial tex-tual variations. Second, in-distribution (ID) gener-alization requires the agent to solve new instances of known optimization archetypes by reusing sta-ble modeling and solving workflows. Third, out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization requires the agent to adapt when new domains introduce se-mantic variants of known archetypes or entirely new archetypes. These methods mainly organize reusable knowledge at the case level. Such case-level reuse can be sensitive to narrative changes, in-sufficient for distilling workflow-level knowledge shared by structurally equivalent problems, and limited in adapting to shifted or emerging problem types. This motivates an archetype-centric view of experience reuse, where optimization problems are organized by their canonical structures rather than surface textual similarity. To provide empirical evidence for this view, this paper conducts exploratory experiments on the embedding-space clusterability of optimiza-tion problems under archetype-based representa-tions. We use problems from the combinatorial optimization dataset N ANO -CO, a self-constructed dataset described in the Appendix A. As shown in Figure 1b, when problems are represented by their archetype embeddings, instances with identi-cal optimization structures form compact and well-separated groups under t-SNE (Van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008) projection. In contrast, Fig-ure 1a shows that raw problem-text embeddings lead to lower intra-class compactness and severe inter-class overlap, indicating that surface narra-tives are not reliable indicators of reusable opti-mization workflows. Figures 1c and 1d further show that archetype embeddings improve nearest-neighbor retrieval in both Hit@1 and MAP@5. These results suggest that archetype-based repre-sentations provide a more suitable foundation for retrieving, clustering, and reusing optimization ex-perience. Based on the above observations, this paper pro-pose O PT SKILLS , an agent system for archetype-centric workflow reuse in optimization modeling and solving. To address the brittleness of case-level reuse under narrative variations , O PT SKILLS clus-ters optimization problems according to their under-lying archetypes rather than surface-level textual similarity, allowing semantically different descrip-tions with the same canonical structure to share reusable experience. To improve ID generaliza-tion within known optimization archetypes , O PT -SKILLS explores diverse modeling paradigms and solver configurations inside each archetype cluster, and distills intra-cluster trajectories into reusable workflow-level skills. To enhance OOD generaliza-tion under distribution shifts , O PT SKILLS further supports skill learning from newly obtained feasi-ble trajectories, either refining existing skills for semantic variants of known archetypes or expand-ing the skill library for emerging problem types. In this way, O PT SKILLS contributes an archetype-centric experience reuse framework that directly targets robust generalization across narratives, ID generalization within known archetypes, and OOD adaptation to shifted optimization scenarios. We evaluate O PT SKILLS on problem datasets encompassing multiple problem types and scenar-ios, where it achieves a state-of-the-art Micro-Avg. accuracy of 68.27% , outperforming the strongest baseline Trace2Skill by 4.81% . On the more chal-lenging large-scale MIPLIB-NL benchmark, O PT -SKILLS achieves 26.91% accuracy, outperforming DeepSeek-V3.2-Thinking by 4.53% . After skill learning on the self-constructed N ANO -CO dataset, OPT SKILLS further reaches 72.79% accuracy on the OOD NLCO benchmark, showing the benefit of archetype-centric experience reuse under distri-bution shifts. The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-lows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 presents the proposed O PT SKILLS framework. Sec-tion 4 describes the experimental setup and ana-lyzes the results. Section 5 concludes the paper. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 LLMs for Modeling and Solving Optimization Problems Post-Training Methods. These approaches seek to encode optimization modeling directly into math-ematical models through post-training of LLMs. Representative researches are based on multi-ple paradigms such as Supervised Fine-tuning (ORLM (Huang et al., 2025a), OptMATH (Lu et al., 2025), AutoOR (Motwani et al., 2026)), Preference Optimization (LLMOPT (Jiang et al., 2025a)), and Reinforcement Learning (SIRL (Chen et al., 2026), Learned Skill Library Phase I Skill Discovery via Cluster-Based Distillation Phase II Skill Learning Problem Archetype Representation 1Ingredients Extraction     

> Variables Constraints Objective
> flow_variable capacity_limit linear_cost non_negative flow_conservation minimize_cost

... ... ... 

> Problem Editing
> You are managing an entity(travel agency) that offers 21 unique item(vacation packages) to ...
> Optimization Problems Input Ingredients Embedding Edited Problem Embedding Archetype Embedding

Phase III Test Evaluation 4 Cluster-Based Skill Distillation      

> Clustering over Collecting Analyses
> Skill Distillation
> Skill Builder Skill Documents
> Initial Skill Library New Problem
> Skill Library Skill Selector
> Ingredients Edited Problem
> Skill Selected Skill Refinement 5
> <think> <obs>

...       

> No Skill Selected
> Skill Refiner
> Inference w/
> Trajectory Analysis Refined Skill
> Skill Expansion 6
> Skill Builder Reusing 2Rollout
> 3Analysis
> New Skill
> 2Solver Portfolio Rollout
> Analysis
> ✓
> ×
> Reusable S.O.P Common Pitfalls
> 3Trajectory Analysis Solver Pool
> Solver N

## ...    

> Solver B
> v
> Solver A
> Top-K Selection For Each Problem Rollout ×K
> ✓Positive Trajectory Prediction Correct
> Solver Selecting Parallel Rollout

× Negative Trajectory Prediction Wrong 

> ✓

×  

> ✓
> <think> <obs>

... 

> Skill-Guided Inference
> <prediction> <formulation> Correct / Wrong

Figure 2: An overview of O PT SKILLS . OPT SKILLS consists of three phases. Phase I: (1) Problem Archetype Representation , (2) Solver Portfolio Rollout , (3) Trajectory Analysis , and (4) Cluster-Based Skill Distillation 

build the initial skill library M0. Phase II: for a new problem, skill selector routes it to (5) Skill Refinement or (6) Skill Expansion , yielding the learned skill library M∗. Phase III: the selected skill guides test-time inference. 

OR-R1 (Ding et al., 2026)). 

Agent-Based Methods. Rather than updat-ing model parameters, these methods orchestrate multi-stage LLM workflows that decompose mod-eling, coding, solving, and verification into modu-lar stages. Chain-of-Experts (Xiao et al., 2024) and OptiMUS (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024) partition complex problems across specialized expert agents and organize them into structured agent topologies. ORMind (Wang et al., 2025) and ORThought (Yang et al., 2025b) incorporate cognitive reasoning and expert-level modeling heuristics to systematically map business requirements onto mathematical ab-stractions and solver implementations. 

Experience-Enhanced Methods. Recent ef-forts begin integrating external experience, shift-ing the LLM-based optimization tasks from single-shot generation toward experience-augmented mod-eling. DRoC (Jiang et al., 2025b) and Con-straintLLM (Shi et al., 2025) decompose con-straints into retrievable units to assist formal rea-soning. MIRROR (Shi et al., 2026) leverages hi-erarchical search over exemplar libraries to pro-vide task-specific modeling and code references. LEAN-LLM-OPT (Liang et al., 2026) retrieve ref-erence examples from a curated reference dataset and construct structured modeling workflows to guide downstream formulation and code genera-tion; AlphaOPT (Kong et al., 2026) build expe-rience library that distill structured insights from failed attempts. 

2.2 Skill Learning in LLM Agents 

In contrast to task-specific experience augmen-tation, LLM agents equipped with skills offer a more general framework for cross-task knowledge accumulation and reuse. Skills preserve action-able task knowledge yet remain sufficiently ab-stract to support transfer across diverse problems. XSkill (Jiang et al., 2026a) separates operational ex-periences from structural skills. EvoSkill (Alzubi et al., 2026), Memento-Skills (Zhou et al., 2026), and AutoSkill (Yang et al., 2026) emphasize automatic skill discovery, routing, and evolu-tion. Trace2Skill (Ni et al., 2026) inductively consolidates trajectory-local lessons into unified, conflict-free, and transferable skill catalogs. Mem-Skill (Zhang et al., 2026) recasts memory opera-tions themselves as learnable skills, optimizing the skill library through a closed loop of controller, executor, and designer. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Preliminaries Optimization Problem Archetype. An optimiza-tion problem archetype a ∈ A refers to a canonical optimization structure abstracted from concrete ap-plication scenarios. Given an archetype a, we de-note its natural-language instance as x = gu(a),where u specifies the concrete scenario and gu

represents the verbalization process that expresses the underlying optimization structure as a natural-language problem statement. Ideally, x and its archetype a should induce the same optimization model, i.e., fmodel (a) = fmodel (gu(a)) . It indi-cates that optimization modeling should be invari-ant to surface scenario and narrative variations, problems that share the same archetype may dif-fer substantially in scenario settings, narrative con-texts, and natural-language surface forms, yet they typically share similar decision variables, objec-tive functions, constraint patterns, and parameter configurations at the modeling level. 

Skills. A skill s ∈ S is a reusable procedural knowledge document tailored to a class of optimiza-tion problem archetypes. Formally, s = ( m, w, p ),where m denotes skill metadata, including its name and brief description; w denotes the modeling and solving workflow, covering decision variable, ob-jective construction, constraint modeling, solver configuration, status checking, and result parsing; 

p denotes common pitfalls, which summarize fre-quent error patterns in modeling and solving. A skill example is provided in Appendix D. 

3.2 An Overview of O PT SKILLS 

We present O PT SKILLS , an agent system for natural-language optimization tasks. As shown in Figure 2, O PT SKILLS proceeds in three phases. 

Phase I: Skill Discovery via Cluster-Based Distil-lation constructs the initial skill library M0 from the dataset. It first derives archetype of problems through ingredients extraction and problem edit-ing, then clusters problems in this representation space, and distills cluster-based skills from mod-eling and solving trajectories within each cluster. 

Phase II: Skill Learning refines and expands the library on newly encountered problems. Phase III: Test Evaluation retrieves skills relevant to the target problem from M and injects them into the agent as procedural guidance for inference. 

3.3 Phase I: Skill Discovery via Cluster-Based Distillation Problem Archetype Representation. Given a training problem xi, the system first constructs an archetype embedding ei associated with its archetype ai. This embedding captures the prob-lem’s modeling structure while reducing the influ-ence of scenario-specific narratives. An extractor driven by LLM outputs optimization ingredients κi

and an edited problem description ˜xi.The ingredients κi include the variables, con-straints, and objective function at an abstract level. They are not copied from the original text, but are designed to ignore concrete scenarios, entity names, and narrative backgrounds as much as pos-sible. The edited text ˜xi replaces scenario-specific narratives and entity names with generic placehold-ers while preserving the original parameters, con-straints, and numerical information. The archetype embeddings ei = Norm( α ·

wi + (1 − α) · vi) are calculated as the normal-ized weighted sum of wi and vi, which are the embeddings of κi and ˜xi, respectively. We employ Qwen3-Embedding-v3 as the embedding model, and the weight α ∈ [0 , 1] controls the relative con-tributions of κi and ˜xi. Problems that share a simi-lar archetype a are expected to have high similarity between their archetype embeddings ei, which pro-vides the basis for clustering. 

Solver Portfolio Rollout. For each problem, this module explores multiple different modeling approaches and solver configurations, and collects solution trajectories. The rationale is that different modeling paradigms and solver configurations may vary in their applicability and stability for the same optimization problems. Given ˜xi and κi, an LLM-based solver selector chooses a subset Bi consisting of the top-k most likely solvers from the candidate pool B. For each solver b ∈ B i, the LLM first gen-erates an optimization model zbi . It then iteratively generates executable solver code cbi,t and receives execution observations obi,t .Assume that after T bi iterations of code genera-tion and solving, a feasible solution ˆybi is obtained. We define the modeling and solving trajectory un-der the specific combination of modeling paradigm and solver configuration b as 

τ bi =  zbi , c bi, 1, o bi, 1, c bi, 2, o bi, 2, . . . , c bi,T bi

, ˆybi

. (1) The trajectory set is Ti = {τ bi | b ∈ B i}. In the trajectory set, a trajectory is labeled positive if ˆybimatches the ground-truth answer y∗ 

> i

; otherwise, it is labeled negative. This partitions Ti into positive trajectory set T + 

> i

and negative trajectory set T − 

> i

.

Trajectory Analysis. Given T + 

> i

and T − 

> i

, an LLM-based skill analyst is used to distill rollout trajectories into readable analyses. From positive trajectories, it extracts effective solver configura-tions and reusable modeling and solving proce-dures, summarized as standard operating proce-dures (SOPs). From negative trajectories, it iden-tifies failure causes and summarizes them as com-mon pitfalls: 

qi = Aη(T + 

> i

, T − 

> i

) = ( ri, p i). (2) The skill analyst Aη returns two components: reusable SOPs ri and the corresponding common pitfalls pi. Each analysis qi serves as an input to skill distillation, contributing an atomic unit of dis-tilled knowledge. 

Cluster-Based Skill Distillation. After obtain-ing ei, Ti, and analysis qi for each training prob-lem, problems are clustered according to their archetype embeddings, and reusable skills are dis-tilled at the cluster level. Specifically, it applies DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996) to embeddings, pro-ducing C = DBSCAN( {ei}Ni=1 ; ϵ, m ), where ϵ is the neighborhood radius and m is the minimum number of samples required to form a core point. Since ei is normalized, cosine distance is used for clustering. Each cluster C ∈ C corresponds to a group of problems with a similar archetype. For each cluster, an LLM-based skill builder ag-gregates the trajectory analysis of its member prob-lems and distills a skill sC = Bη({qi | i ∈ C}).The resulting set M0 = {sC | C ∈ C} forms the initial skill library. Cluster-based distillation aggregates diverse positive and negative analyses under the same problem archetype, yielding proce-dural knowledge that is less dependent on instance-specific artifacts and more suitable for reuse. 

3.4 Phase II: Skill Learning 

After constructing the initial skill library M0, O PT -SKILLS incrementally improves it on newly en-countered problems. Given a new problem x, the system first applies the same ingredients extraction and problem editing steps as in Phase I. Based on these, an LLM-based skill selector identifies a can-didate skill by comparing the problem against the names and descriptions of all skills in the current library. The selected candidate is then passed to an LLM-based judge, which determines whether the skill should be accepted for solving the problem. If a matching skill is accepted, the system refines it using evidence from the new solution trajectory. Otherwise, the problem is treated as a potential new archetype and may be used to expand the library when sufficient evidence is available. 

Skill Refinement. When an existing skill s⋆ =(m⋆, w ⋆, p ⋆) is selected, it is invoked as procedural guidance to solve the new problem x. The agent then generates a solution trajectory τ , which is evaluated according to the correctness of the an-swer. A positive trajectory provides evidence for reinforcing the reusable SOPs in w⋆. A negative trajectory contributes failure evidence to the com-mon pitfalls p⋆. The trajectory is distilled into an analysis q by skill analyst Aη, and then used to update the selected skill s∗ into a new skill srefined 

by an LLM-based skill refiner. The refiner updates the workflow component 

w⋆ using positive SOP evidence and augments the pitfall component p⋆ using negative evidence, while preserving the skill metadata and applicabil-ity boundary. The refined skill srefined replaces s⋆

in the library. 

Skill Expansion. When no suitable skill is found, the new problem is treated as a candidate for a new archetype. O PT SKILLS performs solver portfolio rollout to obtain a set of candidate trajec-tories Tx = {τ bx | b ∈ B x}. As in Phase I, the skill analyst summarizes them into trajectory analysis q.To avoid adding unsupported procedural knowl-edge, O PT SKILLS expands the library only when at least one positive trajectory is available. In that case, a skill builder constructs a new skill from the trajectory analysis as snew = Bη({q}), and the library is updated to Mt+1 = Mt ∪ { snew }.

3.5 Phase III: Test Evaluation 

During testing, O PT SKILLS uses the learned skill library M∗ as a fixed resource and does not per-form any further updates. For each test problem 

x, the system first applies the same extractor as in previous phases to obtain the optimization ingredi-ents κ and the edited problem ˜x. An LLM-based skill selector then identifies the most relevant skill from M∗ according to κ and ˜x, relying on the skill names and descriptions as retrieval cues. The se-lected skill is used to guide the LLM agent during inference, and the prediction is finally evaluated against the ground-truth answer y∗.Table 1: Comparison of the SA metric (Pass@1) across 5 benchmarks. O PT SKILLS -D and O PT SKILLS -Q indicate the O PT SKILLS based on DeepSeek-V3.2 and Qwen3-235B-A22b-instruct-2507, respectively. Bold indicates the 1st, underline indicates the 2nd, :::: 

wavy :::::::: 

underline indicates indicates the 3rd.                                                                                                                  

> Category Models / Methods Macro-Avg. Micro-Avg. Rank OptiBench Mamo.C OptMATH IndustryOR ComplexOR
> General Models GPT-5.4 51.71 57.82 669.09 47.39 46.39 29.00 :::
> 66.67 Gemini-3.1-Pro 53.58 57.88 566.56 46.45 54.22 34.00 :::
> 66.67 Qwen3-235B 42.63 52.36 763.80 41.71 39.76 29.00 38.89 DeepSeek-V3.2 43.21 49.45 962.64 27.49 40.36 30.00 55.56 Agent-Based Methods Chain-of-Experts 38.84 52.36 862.31 51.66 35.54 28.00 16.67 OptiMUS 34.14 45.18 13 60.99 27.49 22.89 26.00 33.33 ORMind 36.69 47.37 11 61.82 34.60 21.69 32.00 33.33 ORThought 41.92 46.91 12 57.69 38.86 26.51 31.00 55.56 Experience-Enhanced Methods LEAN-LLM-OPT 41.23 49.27 10 62.15 43.13 22.89 28.0 50.0 AlphaOPT 50.92 58.55 470.25 54.50 36.75 32.00 61.11 Skill-Based Methods Trace2Skill 56.97 63.46 275.21 :::
> 54.03 49.40 34.00 72.22
> OptSkills-Q :::
> 54.64 ::::
> 61.46 :
> 3:::
> 71.74 53.55 54.22 27.00 :::
> 66.67 OptSkills-D 62.04 68.27 177.02 63.51 61.45 36.00 72.22

4 Experiments 

Datasets for Optimization Skills Construction. 

To acquire problem instances encompassing di-verse types and scenarios, we utilize the OptMATH-Train (Lu et al., 2025) dataset as a candidate pool. We then perform uniform sampling across prob-lem types and random sampling across scenarios, yielding 300 samples for training O PT SKILLS . The distribution across problem types is as follows: Lin-ear Programming (75), Mixed-Integer Linear Pro-gramming (75), Integer Programming (75), Non-Linear Programming (45), and Second-order Cone Programming (30), spanning 20 distinct problem scenarios. OPT SKILLS first employs 150 instances for cluster-based skill distillation to derive an initial set of skills. Subsequently, O PT SKILLS contin-ues to learn on the remaining 150 samples. This phase serves to both augment the skill repository with new skills and refine existing skills. Detailed experiment setups are provided in Appendix B. 

Evaluation Benchmarks. For perfor-mance comparison, we adopt 5 benchmarks: OptiBench (Yang et al., 2025c), OptMATH-Bench (Lu et al., 2025), Mamo.C (Huang et al., 2025b), IndustryOR (Huang et al., 2025a), ComplexOR (Xiao et al., 2024). For Skill Learning evaluation, we employ the hard split of NLCO Benchmark (Jiang et al., 2026b). These benchmarks feature high problem difficulty and rich structural diversity. Detailed descriptions are provided in Appendix C. 

Baselines. We benchmark our method against eleven distinct baselines in four categories. First, we include four general LLMs: GPT-5.4 (Ope-nAI, 2026), Gemini-3.1-Pro (DeepMind, 2026), DeepSeek-V3.2 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), and Qwen3-235B (Yang et al., 2025a); these models directly generate solving code via prompting in a non-tool-use manner. Second, we compare with four LLM-based agent frameworks: CoE (Xiao et al., 2024), OptiMUS (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024), ORMind (Wang et al., 2025), and OR-Thought (Yang et al., 2025b). Third, we include two experience-enhanced agent-based approaches, AlphaOPT (Kong et al., 2026) and LEAN-LLM-OPT (Liang et al., 2026), both of which support knowledge accumulation and reuse. Finally, we include Trace2Skill (Ni et al., 2026) as a strong skill-based baseline, since it also leverages distilled skills to enhance agent performance. Detailed re-production settings are provided in Appendix E. Through extensive experiments, we aim to an-swer the following research questions: 

Q1: How does the optimization modeling and solving performance of O PT SKILLS compare with baseline methods? 

Q2: How do skills enhance the agent’s capability in modeling and solving optimization problems? 

Q3: What advantages does the clustering strat-egy offer for skill utilization? 

Q4: How well does O PT SKILLS generalize to in-distribution and out-of-distribution domains? 

Q5: How effective is O PT SKILLS in handling real-world and large-scale optimization problems? 

4.1 Main Results 

We evaluate all methods using Pass@1 solving ac-curacy (SA), and summarize the results in Table 1. 

Comparison of O PT SKILLS and Baseline Methods (To Q1). As summarized in Table 1, O PT -Table 2: Ablation study of O PT SKILLS on the SA metric across 5 benchmarks. The table evaluates the contribution of each module by incrementally adding them to the baseline model. A checkmark indicates that the corresponding module is enabled, while an empty box indicates that it is disabled.        

> Experimental Groups Tool-Call Agent Skill Distillation Cluster-Based Distillation Skill Learning OptiBench Mamo.C OptMATH IndustryOR ComplexOR
> Group 1

2 2 2 2 73.22 53.08 54.21 34.00 66.67 Group 2 2 2 2 2 69.75 56.40 59.64 32.00 66.67 Group 3 2 2 2 2 74.71 59.24 60.84 35.00 72.22 Group 4 2 2 2 2 77.02 63.51 61.45 36.00 72.22 

SKILLS (using DeepSeek-V3.2 as the LLM back-bone) consistently achieves state-of-the-art perfor-mance across almost all benchmarks, attaining a micro-average pass@1 accuracy of 68.27% and demonstrating significant improvements over all baselines. To isolate the contribution of our sys-tem from the inherent capabilities of the underly-ing LLM backbone (DeepSeek-V3.2), we conduct an ablation study by using Qwen3-235B-A22b-instruct-2507 as the base model during inference. This configuration achieves a micro-average accu-racy of 61.46%, comparable to that of Trace2Skill, and outperforms the majority of baselines. These results suggest that the performance gains stem from O PT SKILLS itself rather than from the choice of the backbone model. Notably, O PT SKILLS exhibits pronounced ad-vantages on challenging benchmarks such as Opt-MATH and Mamo.C, where it substantially outper-forms prompt-based baselines. Even on the rela-tively simple OptiBench benchmark, O PT SKILLS 

maintains a significant accuracy margin. 

4.2 Ablation Study The Contribution of Skills to Agent Perfor-mance (To Q2). We conduct an empirical analysis of the cluster-based skill distillation process em-ployed in Phase I. The Pass@1 accuracy of each condition across 5 benchmarks is reported in Ta-ble 2. Although augmenting the baseline with per-sample skills (Group 2) yields modest gains on challenging benchmarks such as Mamo.C and Opt-MATH, the overall improvement remains marginal. This stems from functional overlap among skills. Moreover, per-sample extraction induces instance-specific biases, and skill selection relies on descrip-tions that primarily indicate applicability condi-tions rather than generalizable patterns. Conse-quently, individual per-sample skills exhibit limited transferability across structurally similar problems. Moreover, we find that the system yields 129 distinct skills, of which 81 (62.8%) are never in-voked during inference in 5 benchmarks. However, these unselected skills are not inherently ineffec-tive; when multiple semantically similar skills coex-ist, the model’s likelihood of identifying a success-ful skill for a specific instance degrades markedly, compromising solution reliability. 

Enhancement of Skill Application via Cluster-ing Strategies (To Q3). In contrast, the clustered skill library (Group 3) exhibits substantial gains over the baselines. This shows that clustering sig-nificantly enhances the overall quality of the skill library, thereby facilitating robust generalization across problems that share the same archetype. In addition, we used cluster-based distillation to derive a set of 46 skills. Among them, only 7 skills remained unused throughout the inference process (15.2%). In contrast, the non-clustering baseline exhibited a higher proportion of skills never being invoked (62.8%). This indicates that the clustering-based distillation process effectively mitigates re-dundancy within the skill library, thereby enhanc-ing the likelihood with which LLMs identify and retrieve the most appropriate skill for a given prob-lem instance. Since the clustering strategy has an impact on the quality of cluster-based skill generation, to val-idate the effectiveness of our proposed archetype-based clustering approach, we conduct a compar-ative analysis against the strategy that performs clustering directly on embeddings derived from raw problem text. Detailed results and discussions are provided in Appendix F.1. 

Skill Learning on In-Distribution Data (To Q4-1). As summarized in Group 4 of Table 2, the proposed configuration demonstrates improve-ments in average accuracy across almost all bench-marks compared to Group 3. The exceptions are IndustryOR and ComplexOR, where the relatively high error rates (Xiao et al., 2025) may weaken the statistical significance of the observed gains. Ad-ditionally, ComplexOR contains a comparatively small number of samples, which further limits the robustness of the comparison. To investigate the growth dynamics of the skill li-brary during skill learning and its impact on solving performance, we establish four checkpoints during OPT SKILLS ’s learning process on OptiBench, cor-responding to skill library sizes of 46, 49, 53, and 56. We independently evaluate the O PT SKILLS 

configured with each checkpoint’s skill library on the same benchmark. The solving accuracy on OptiBench exhibits a non-monotonic upward trend as the library grows from 46 to 56 skills (74.71% 

→ 74.05% → 75.37% → 77.02%). Despite a mi-nor dip at the intermediate checkpoint (49 skills), the overall trajectory demonstrates that expanding skill coverage within the same data distribution yields sustained performance gains, validating O PT -SKILLS ’s capacity for self-improvement through skill learning. The bar chart of the scaling phe-nomenon is shown in Appendix F.3. 

4.3 Discussions Skill Learning on Out-of-Distribution Data (To Q4-2). To assess O PT SKILLS ’s generalization and adaptation ability under distribution shift, we first evaluate the initial skill library on the NLCO benchmark, an OOD combinatorial optimization benchmark. We then construct an OOD adapta-tion dataset, N ANO -CO, via template-based syn-thesis. N ANO -CO comprises combinatorial opti-mization problems whose problem-type distribu-tion differs from the 300 training samples above. We use N ANO -CO for skill learning and evaluate the adapted O PT SKILLS again on NLCO. As reported in Table 3, O PT SKILLS -D with ini-tial skill library (before learning) achieves a 5.96 percentage-point absolute improvement over Tool-Call Agent (68.56% vs. 62.60%), indicating that the initial skill library already exhibits nontrivial cross-domain transfer. Based on the 46 skills acquired in the initial skill library, we expanded the skill library with 47 new skills on N ANO -CO, resulting in a total of 93 skills. We then evaluated O PT SKILLS with the expanded skill library on the hard split of NLCO benchmark, achieving an accuracy of 72.79%, a 10.19 percentage-point absolute gain over the base-line. This suggests that O PT SKILLS can continu-ously expand its coverage of problem archetypes under shifted problem distributions. Across all evaluated instances, successful trajec-tories exhibit a higher utilization rate of new skills compared to failed ones. Except for 9 failed sam-      

> Table 3: Performance comparison of O PT SKILLS on the NLCO dataset. Before Learning denotes direct evalua-tion using the initial skill library obtained by cluster-based distillation from 150 samples in the previous dataset. After Learning denotes the setting where O PT -SKILLS further performs Skill Learning on our synthe-sized dataset.
> Method NLCO Accuracy (%)
> Tool-Call Agent 62.60 Before Learning 68.56 After Learning 72.79

ples, 644 of the 1,565 successfully solved samples employ new skills. In contrast, only 176 of the 576 failed samples utilized new skills, with the re-mainder relying exclusively on existing skills. To elucidate the contribution of newly learned skills, we plot the usage rate of old and new skills as a pie chart, which is provided in Appendix F.4. 

Solving Capability on High-Dimensional and Large-Scale Problems (To Q5). To evaluate the capability of O PT SKILLS on real-world and high-dimensional scenarios, we perform an evaluation on the challenging benchmark MIPLIB-NL (Li et al., 2026), which is characterized by large-scale decision variables and constraints. The results show that O PT SKILLS -D achieves a solving ac-curacy of 26.91% and exceeds DeepSeek-v3.2-thinking (22.38%) by 4.53 % reported in the paper of MIPLIB-NL. Among the problems correctly solved by OPT SKILLS , the dimensionality of de-cision variables reaches up to 87,482. This indi-cates that O PT SKILLS maintains competitive per-formance even when confronted with large-scale, industrial problem instances. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper proposes O PT SKILLS , an agent system that clusters optimization problems by problem archetypes and distills reusable skills from diverse solving trajectories. Across a diverse collection of problem spanning multiple problem types and scenarios, these archetype-level skills improve solv-ing performance and generalization compared with strong baselines. Further experiments show that OPT SKILLS can adapt its skill library to new prob-lem distributions and remains competitive on large-scale optimization benchmarks. Limitations 

OPT SKILLS relies on LLM-generated intermediate abstractions to construct problem archetype repre-sentations, including ingredients and edited prob-lem. Although this design reduces the influence of surface narratives, errors in ingredient extrac-tion or problem editing may propagate to clus-tering, skill selection, and downstream skill dis-tillation. For example, missing a key constraint or incorrectly abstracting the objective may place a problem into an inappropriate cluster and lead to less reliable skill reuse. Future work should incorporate stronger verification mechanisms for archetype extraction, such as symbolic consistency checks. In addition, the quality of the learned skills library depends on the granularity of the clustering of archetypes. Over-fragmented clusters may pro-duce redundant skills that increase the difficulty of skill selection, whereas over-merged clusters may combine different problem archetypes and yield ambiguous procedural guidance. This may partly explain why increasing the number of skills does not always lead to monotonic improvements across benchmarks. Although our sensitivity analysis sug-gests that the selected clustering setting provides a reasonable trade-off, developing adaptive cluster-ing, skill merging, and skill pruning mechanisms remains an important direction for future work. 

References 

Ali AhmadiTeshnizi, Wenzhi Gao, and Madeleine Udell. 2024. OptiMUS: Scalable optimization modeling with (MI)LP solvers and large language models. In Advances in Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria. Salaheddin Alzubi, Noah Provenzano, Jaydon Bingham, Weiyuan Chen, and Tu Vu. 2026. EvoSkill: Auto-mated skill discovery for multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02766. Yitian Chen, Jingfan Xia, Siyu Shao, Dongdong Ge, and Yinyu Ye. 2026. Solver-Informed RL: Ground-ing large language models for authentic optimization modeling. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. Google DeepMind. 2026. Gemini 3.1 pro. DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu, Bowei Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chen-hao Xu, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, and 245 others. 2025. DeepSeek-v3.2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models. Preprint, arXiv:2512.02556. Zezhen Ding, Zhen Tan, Jiheng Zhang, and Tianlong Chen. 2026. OR-R1: Automating modeling and solv-ing of operations research optimization problem via test-time reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 40, pages 228–236. Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, and Xiaowei Xu. 1996. A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-96), Portland, Oregon, USA , pages 226–231. AAAI Press. Chenyu Huang, Zhengyang Tang, Shixi Hu, Ruoqing Jiang, Xin Zheng, Dongdong Ge, Benyou Wang, and Zizhuo Wang. 2025a. ORLM: A customizable frame-work in training large models for automated optimiza-tion modeling. Operations Research. Xuhan Huang, Qingning Shen, Yan Hu, Anningzhe Gao, and Benyou Wang. 2025b. LLMs for mathematical modeling: Towards bridging the gap between nat-ural and mathematical languages. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics 2025 ,pages 2678–2710, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Caigao Jiang, Xiang Shu, Hong Qian, Xingyu Lu, Jun Zhou, Aimin Zhou, and Yang Yu. 2025a. LL-MOPT: learning to define and solve general optimiza-tion problems from scratch. In Advances in The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, Singapore. Guanyu Jiang, Zhaochen Su, Xiaoye Qu, and Yi R. Fung. 2026a. XSkill: Continual learning from experi-ence and skills in multimodal agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12056. Xia Jiang, Jing Chen, Cong Zhang, Jie Gao, Cheng-peng Hu, Chenhao Zhang, Yaoxin Wu, and Yingqian Zhang. 2026b. Reasoning in a combinatorial and constrained world: Benchmarking llms on natural-language combinatorial optimization. Preprint ,arXiv:2602.02188. Xia Jiang, Yaoxin Wu, Chenhao Zhang, and Yingqian Zhang. 2025b. DRoC: Elevating large language mod-els for complex vehicle routing via decomposed re-trieval of constraints. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations. Minwei Kong, Ao Qu, Xiaotong Guo, Wenbin Ouyang, Chonghe Jiang, Han Zheng, Yining Ma, Dingyi Zhuang, Yuhan Tang, Junyi Li, Shenhao Wang, Haris Koutsopoulos, Hai Wang, Cathy Wu, and Jinhua Zhao. 2026. AlphaOPT: Formulating optimization programs with self-improving llm experience library. Preprint, arXiv:2510.18428. Zhong Li, Hongliang Lu, Tao Wei, Yuxuan Chen, Wenyu Liu, Yuan Lan, Fan Zhang, and Zaiwen Wen. 2026. Constructing industrial-scale optimization modeling benchmark. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning. Kuo Liang, Yuhang Lu, Jianming Mao, Shuyi Sun, Chunwei Yang, Congcong Zeng, Xiao Jin, Hanzhang Qin, Ruihao Zhu, and Chung-Piaw Teo. 2026. Large-scale optimization model auto-formulation: Harness-ing llm flexibility via structured workflow. Preprint, arXiv:2601.09635. Hongliang Lu, Zhonglin Xie, Yaoyu Wu, Can Ren, Yuxuan Chen, and Zaiwen Wen. 2025. Opt-MATH: A scalable bidirectional data synthesis frame-work for optimization modeling. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning. Sumeet Ramesh Motwani, Chuan Du, Aleksander Petrov, Christopher Davis, Philip Torr, Antonio Papania-Davis, and Weishi Yan. 2026. AutoOR: Scal-ably post-training llms to autoformalize operations re-search problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.16804. Jingwei Ni, Yihao Liu, Xinpeng Liu, Yutao Sun, Mengyu Zhou, Pengyu Cheng, Dexin Wang, Er-chao Zhao, Xiaoxi Jiang, and Guanjun Jiang. 2026. Trace2Skill: Distill trajectory-local lessons into transferable agent skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25158. OpenAI. 2026. Introducing gpt-5.4. Weichun Shi, Minghao Liu, Wanting Zhang, Langchen Shi, Fuqi Jia, Feifei Ma, and Jian Zhang. 2025. ConstraintLLM: A neuro-symbolic frame-work for industrial-level constraint programming. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 15999–16019, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Yifan Shi, Jialong Shi, Jiayi Wang, Ye Fan, and Jiany-ong Sun. 2026. MIRROR: A multi-agent framework with iterative adaptive revision and hierarchical re-trieval for optimization modeling in operations re-search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03318. Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine learning research, 9(11). Zhiyuan Wang, Bokui Chen, Yinya Huang, Qingx-ing Cao, Ming He, Jianping Fan, and Xiaodan Liang. 2025. ORMind: A cognitive-inspired end-to-end reasoning framework for operations research. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 6: Industry Track) , pages 104–131, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ziyang Xiao, Jingrong Xie, Lilin Xu, Shisi Guan, Jingyan Zhu, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin Fu, WingYin Yu, Han Wu, Wei Shi, Qingcan Kang, Jiahui Duan, Tao Zhong, Mingxuan Yuan, Jia Zeng, Yuan Wang, Gang Chen, and Dongxiang Zhang. 2025. A survey of optimization modeling meets llms: Progress and future directions. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI ’25. Ziyang Xiao, Dongxiang Zhang, Yangjun Wu, Lilin Xu, Yuan Jessica Wang, Xiongwei Han, Xiao-jin Fu, Tao Zhong, Jia Zeng, Mingli Song, and Gang Chen. 2024. Chain-of-Experts: When LLMs meet complex operations research problems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, Vienna, Austria. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025a. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Beinuo Yang, Qishen Zhou, Junyi Li, Chenxing Su, Panagiotis Angeloudis, and Simon Hu. 2025b. ORThought: Benchmarking and automating lo-gistics optimization modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14410. Yutao Yang, Junsong Li, Qianjun Pan, Bihao Zhan, Yux-uan Cai, Lin Du, Jie Zhou, Kai Chen, Qin Chen, Xin Li, Bo Zhang, and Liang He. 2026. AutoSkill: Experience-driven lifelong learning via skill self-evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01145. Zhicheng Yang, Yiwei Wang, Yinya Huang, Zhi-jiang Guo, Wei Shi, Xiongwei Han, Liang Feng, Linqi Song, Xiaodan Liang, and Jing Tang. 2025c. OptiBench meets ReSocratic: Measure and im-prove LLMs for optimization modeling. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, Singapore. Haozhen Zhang, Quanyu Long, Jianzhu Bao, Tao Feng, Weizhi Zhang, Haodong Yue, and Wenya Wang. 2026. MemSkill: Learning and evolving mem-ory skills for self-evolving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02474. Huichi Zhou, Siyuan Guo, Anjie Liu, Zhongwei Yu, Ziqin Gong, Bowen Zhao, Zhixun Chen, Meng-long Zhang, Yihang Chen, Jinsong Li, Runyu Yang, Qiangbin Liu, Xinlei Yu, Jianmin Zhou, Na Wang, Chunyang Sun, and Jun Wang. 2026. Memento-Skills: Let agents design agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18743. 

Appendix A Data Synthesis 

To evaluate and enhance the generalizable mod-eling capability of O PT SKILLS on combinatorial optimization problems, we constructed a collection of synthetic combinatorial optimization instances, named N ANO -CO, as an adaptation set for skill learning before evaluation on the held-out NLCO 5 5 5 5

> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 55
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> 5
> Assignment & Matching
> Network Flow
> Routing & Tours
> Trees & Graph Structures
> Location & Covering
> Packing & Cutting
> Scheduling
> Linear assignment
> Generalized / quadratic
> Matching & marriage
> Path & transport
> Single-commodity flow
> Multi-commodity flow
> TSP variants
> Vehicle / arc routing
> Postman routes
> Spanning tree variants
> Coloring & clique
> Cuts & matching
> Facility location
> Covering / center
> Bin packing
> Cutting stock
> Shop scheduling

Synthetic 

Data Figure 3: Taxonomy of the synthetic data. The dataset contains 49 combinatorial optimization problem types grouped into seven families. Each leaf node represents one problem type. 

benchmark. Figure 3 summarizes the taxonomy of this synthetic dataset, including its high-level prob-lem families, subfamilies, and individual problem types. We manually curated a set of common combina-torial optimization problems and their representa-tive variants. Based on these problem categories, we further developed 49 seed code templates, with each seed template corresponding to one problem type. All seed templates were manually inspected and verified using solvers. Particular attention was paid to potential implementation issues in the objec-tive functions, constraints, decision-variable def-initions, and parameter settings that could affect optimality, ensuring that each template can con-sistently generate instances with verifiable global optimal solutions. Then, while preserving the origi-nal mathematical structure, we used large language models to generate five new themes with realistic business contexts for each template, such as logis-tics scheduling, emergency department rostering, and semiconductor manufacturing. To ensure that thematic rewriting does not alter the original combinatorial optimization structure, we established a strict entity-mapping relationship for each new theme. For example, a “machine” in the original problem may be mapped to an “op-erating room,” while its modeling role, constraint relationships, and parameter semantics remain un-changed. For each themed instance, we further in-jected an independent random seed to generate the corresponding numerical parameters and invoked solvers to verify both feasibility and global opti-mality. This process yielded a total of 245 training instances. To contextualize the relationship between NANO -CO and NLCO, we manually compared their problem categories. An NLCO task category is counted as covered if it has an exact or close counterpart in N ANO -CO. As shown in Figure 4, NANO -CO covers 22 of the 43 NLCO task cat-egories, indicating substantial overlap while still leaving room for NLCO-specific problem types. 0 10 20 30 40 43    

> NLCO task categories
> Covered 22 Other 21 Figure 4: NLCO task-category coverage by N ANO -CO exact or close counterparts.

Regarding instance scale, the number of constraints in N ANO -CO ranges from 1 to 5, with an average of 2.8, and the number of decision variables ranges from 9 to 310, with an average of 48. 

B Experiment Setup 

B.1 Configuration of O PT SKILLS 

Throughout all experiments, DeepSeek-V3.2 (non-thinking mode) serves as the uniform underlying LLM for all modules of O PT SKILLS . The Embed-ding model is Qwen3-Embedding-v3. We set the maximum agent-loop turns to 12 and set the tem-perature of the LLM backend to 0 across all stages. When fusing the archetype embeddings, we set the parameter α to 0.55. In the solver portfolio stage, the top-k parameter is set to 3. For DBSCAN clus-tering, the density parameter ϵ is set to 0.05, and the minimum number of samples m is set to 1. The random seed for training-data shuffling is set to 42. 

B.2 Configuration of Baselines 

For a fair comparison, all agent-based baselines are configured consistently with O PT SKILLS . Specifi-cally, DeepSeek-V3.2 in non-thinking mode is used as the underlying LLM. Unless otherwise specified, the remaining implementation details follow the default settings of each baseline. For AlphaOPT and Trace2Skill, we make nec-essary adaptations to ensure compatibility with our experimental setting and evaluation protocol. The detailed modifications are provided in Ap-pendix E.6 and Appendix E.7. 

C Benchmarks 

To ensure the reliability and consistency of our experimental results, we adopt the cleaned and corrected versions of OptiBench, Mamo.C, Opt-MATH, IndustryOR, and ComplexOR from LL-MOPT (Jiang et al., 2025a), rather than the original datasets. 

C.1 OptiBench 

OptiBench is a large-scale benchmark designed to evaluate the end-to-end capability of large lan-guage models in solving optimization problems from complex inputs. It covers a diverse set of op-timization settings, including linear programming, nonlinear optimization, and problems involving tab-ular data, reflecting practical scenarios where opti-mization tasks may be specified in heterogeneous formats. By incorporating nonlinear objectives or constraints as well as table-based problem informa-tion, OptiBench provides a comprehensive testbed for assessing whether models can accurately under-stand problem descriptions, formulate optimization models, and produce correct solutions across mul-tiple forms of input. 

C.2 Mamo.C 

Mamo.C refers to the Complex_LP subset of the Mamo benchmark, which is designed to evaluate the mathematical modeling ability of large lan-guage models through solver-based answer verifica-tion. It contains 211 undergraduate-level optimiza-tion problems integrating LP and MILP structures. In this benchmark, a model is required to trans-late a natural-language problem description into a solver-readable optimization formulation, and the generated formulation is evaluated by comparing the solver-produced optimal value with the ground-truth answer. Since Mamo.C involves more com-plex decision variables and constraints than the Easy_LP subset, it provides a stricter testbed for evaluating optimization modeling capability. 

C.3 OptMATH 

OptMATH-Bench is a difficult optimization mod-eling benchmark derived from the OptMATH bidi-rectional data synthesis framework. It consists of hard instances selected through solver-based val-idation and rejection sampling, with problem de-scriptions that are substantially longer than those in NL4OPT and MAMO. The benchmark covers a broad range of optimization problem types, in-cluding LP, MILP, IP, NLP, and SOCP, providing a challenging testbed for evaluating whether large language models can formulate and solve complex long-context optimization problems. 

C.4 IndustryOR 

IndustryOR is an industrial benchmark introduced in the ORLM framework for evaluating large lan-guage models on practical operations research prob-lems. Unlike benchmarks that mainly focus on textbook-style or homogeneous linear program-ming instances, IndustryOR is designed to reflect real-world optimization modeling scenarios across multiple industries. It contains 100 practical OR problems covering five types of optimization tasks, including linear programming, integer program-ming, mixed-integer programming, nonlinear pro-gramming, and other optimization problems, with instances organized into three difficulty levels. The benchmark evaluates models by execution accu-racy, where a generated model is considered cor-rect if the optimal value obtained by executing the solver code matches the ground-truth optimal value. 

C.5 ComplexOR 

ComplexOR is a benchmark introduced by Chain-of-Experts (CoE) for evaluating LLMs on com-plex operations research modeling and program-ming problems. Unlike elementary NL4Opt-style instances, ComplexOR focuses on more realistic and challenging OR problems whose descriptions may involve implicit constraints, domain-specific terminology, and long reasoning chains. Models are required not only to understand the natural-language problem statement, but also to construct an appropriate optimization model and generate executable solver code. The benchmark evaluates whether the generated program can pass test cases annotated by OR specialists, thereby assessing the model’s end-to-end capability in complex OR prob-lem formalization and solving. 

C.6 NLCO 

NLCO was originally proposed to evaluate the direct reasoning ability of large language mod-els in natural-language combinatorial optimization. In its original protocol, given a natural-language decision-making scenario, the model directly out-puts a discrete solution without writing code or invoking external solvers, and the output is eval-uated for feasibility and optimality against prob-lem constraints, objective functions, and solver-annotated reference solutions. Covering 43 classes of combinatorial optimization problems, NLCO spans a broad range of structures, including routing, scheduling, packing, assignment, facility location, and graph optimization. In this paper, we use NLCO differently from its original tool-free evaluation setting. Rather than testing direct discrete-solution generation, we adopt NLCO as an out-of-distribution benchmark with natural-language problem statements, diverse combinatorial optimization structures, and verifi-able reference answers. This enables us to examine whether O PT SKILLS can generalize beyond the LP-, MILP-, and NLP-centered benchmarks used in our main experiments to a wider spectrum of combinatorial optimization archetypes. Specifically, we evaluate OPT SKILLS on NLCO’s most difficult Set-L, which contains 43 problem types with 50 instances each, totaling 2,150 test samples. None of these instances is used during O PT SKILLS ’ skill learning or skill evolution process. During evaluation, O PT SKILLS takes the original NLCO problem statement as input and ob-tains the final answer through skill retrieval, mathe-matical modeling, code generation, and execution. The output is then assessed using the ground truth provided by NLCO. Since Set-L enlarges the com-binatorial search space and strengthens global con-straint dependencies, it provides a rigorous test of OPT SKILLS ’ generalization to unseen combinato-rial optimization structures. 

C.7 MIPLIB-NL 

MIPLIB-NL is a high-dimensional and industrial-scale optimization modeling benchmark designed to expose the limitations of existing LLM-based optimization systems on large and difficult prob-lems. It is constructed from real MILP instances in MIPLIB 2017 through a structure-aware reverse construction pipeline, yielding 223 verified natural-language-to-optimization instances with one-to-one correspondence to the original mathematical formulations. Since MIPLIB-NL targets problems whose scale can reach 10 3–10 6 variables and con-straints, it provides a challenging testbed that is substantially closer to real industrial optimization than toy-scale benchmarks. In this work, we adopt MIPLIB-NL to assess the capability of O PT SKILLS in handling high-dimensional optimization problems, especially whether the retrieved skills can still support reli-able modeling and solving under large-scale, struc-turally complex settings. 

D Skill Example 

An example of a skill is provided in Figure 5. A skill contains multiple workflows, we show only one representative workflow. name: TSP_MTZ_Formulation 

description: Model and solve the Traveling Salesperson Problem using the Miller-Tucker-Zemlin (MTZ) formulation with binary arc and integer position variables, producing exact or feasible tours via MIP/CP-SAT solvers. 

Wor kfl ow 1 (CP-SAT with OR -Too ls)

Modeli ng st age 

S T R A T E G Y O V E R V I E W 

Formu late the TSP as a Mixed -Int ege r Pro gram MIP) us ing the OR Too ls

CPSAT so lver int erface . Thi s wor kfl ow le verage s the so lver's nativeconstr aint pro gramm ing str engths for com bi nator ial pro ble ms , us ing a

li nearized MTZ formu lation su itable for exact so lving with parallel search .

1 Defi ne Pro ble m Data Defi ne the set of no de s, typ ic all y N = {0, 1, ..., n-1} whe re 0 is the de pot . Defi ne a di st ance matr ix dist[i][j] for all or de red 

pairs (i, j) whe re i != j. Calc ulate a Big -M parameter, typ ic all y M =len(N) .

2 Create Deci sion Va riable s Create bi nary arc variable s x[i][j] for all i, jin N, i != j. Each variable equ als 1 if arc (i, j) is in the tour . Createint ege r pos ition variable s u[i] for all i in N, with dom ain [0, n-1] . The se

repr esent the visit or de r.

3 Formu late Deg ree Constr aints For each no de j in N, enfor ce exactly on eincom ing arc: sum(x[i][j] for i in N if i != j) == 1. For each no de iin N, enfor ce exactly on e out going arc: sum(x[i][j] for j in N if j != i) == 1.

4 App ly MTZ Subtour Eli mination For all i, j in N whe re i != j and j != depot (e.g., j != 0), add constr aint : u[i] - u[j] + 1 <= M * (1 - x[i] [j]) . Fix the de pot 's pos ition to break symm etry : u[depot] == 0.

5 Defi ne Objec tive Minimize tot al tour di st ance : minimize sum(dist[i][j] *x[i][j] for i in N for j in N if i != j) .

F O R M U L A T I O N T E M P L A T E 

{"sets": ["N: set of nodes (0 is depot)" ], "parameters": ["dist[i][j]: distance from node i to j, for i, j in N, i != j", "M: Big-M constant, typically |N|" ], "decision_variables": ["x[i][j]: binary, 1 if arc (i,j) is selected", "u[i]: integer, position of node i in tour" ], "objective": {"sense": "min", "expression": "sum_{i in N} sum_{j in N, j != i} dist[i][j] * x[i][j]" }, "constraints": ["in_degree: forall j in N: sum_{i in N, i != j} x[i][j] == 1", "out_degree: forall i in N: sum_{j in N, j != i} x[i][j] == 1", "mtz: forall i in N, j in N, i != j, j != depot: u[i] - u[j] + 1 <= M* (1 - x[i][j])", "fix_depot: u[depot] == 0" ]}

C O M M O N P I T F A L L S 

Using a Big -M value that is too sm all , which can cut off valid so lut ions . Use M = n

(num be r of no de s) or n-1 .

For ge tt ing to excl ude the de pot (j != depot ) in the MTZ constr aints , which wou ld incorr ec tly pr event the return arc to the st art .

Not addi ng symm etry -breaki ng constr aints (like fi xing u[depot] ), which can slow 

down the so lver.

Solving st age 

S T R A T E G Y O V E R V I E W 

Solve the MIP mo del us ing OR Too ls' CPSAT so lver, con fig ur ed for parallel search and a time li mit. Extr act and valid ate the tour from the bi nary arc variable s.

1 Con fig ur e Solver Inst ant iate the CPSAT so lver. Set so lver parameters :

num_search_workers for paralleli sm , max_time_in_seconds for time li mit, and

random_seed for repro ducibili ty . Set relative_gap_limit to 0.0 to seek anopt imal so lut ion .

2 Solve and Check Status Invo ke the so lver's Solve method. Check the 

st atus is OPTIMAL or FEASIBLE . Handle INFEASIBLE or MODEL_INVALID with

appropr iate error mess age s.

3 Extr act Solut ion If a fe asible so lut ion exists , rec onstru ct the tour sequ ence .

Start at the de pot . Iterativel y fi nd the next no de j whe re x[current][j] 

equ als 1 in the so lut ion . App end no de s to the tour unt il all are visited ,

verif ying the fi nal arc returns to the de pot .

4 Va lid ate and Report Comput e the tot al di st ance from the extr acted tour sequ ence and comp are it to the so lver's objec tive value for cons ist ency.

Output the tour , tot al di st ance , and so lver st atus .

C O D E U S A G E 

# build model from formulation from ortools.sat.python import cp_model model = cp_model.CpModel() # ... create variables, add constraints and objective as per modeling stage # solve with status / termination checks solver = cp_model.CpSolver() solver.parameters.num_search_workers = 8solver.parameters.max_time_in_seconds = 30.0 solver.parameters.random_seed = 42 status = solver.Solve(model) if status in (cp_model.OPTIMAL, cp_model.FEASIBLE): # Extract tour from solver.Value(x[i][j]) variables tour = [depot] current = depot while len(tour) < len(N): for j in N: if j != current and solver.Value(x[current][j]) > 0.5: tour.append(j) current = jbreak # Validate return to depot if solver.Value(x[current][depot]) > 0.5: tour.append(depot) print(f"Tour: {tour}") else: print("No feasible solution found.") 

C O M M O N P I T F A L L S 

Assum ing OPTIMAL st atus withi n a time li mit; always check for FEASIBLE as well .

Incorr ec t tour rec onstru ction due to not checki ng variable so lut ion values against a

to le rance (e.g., > 0.5 ). 

Not verif ying the fi nal arc cl os es the cycle , which can happ en if the MTZ 

constr aints are misapp lied .Figure 5: An example of the optimization skill. 

E Baselines 

E.1 Reproduction of Chain-of-Experts 

Chain-of-Experts (CoE) is a multi-agent framework for solving operations research problems, where a conductor coordinates multiple specialized experts for terminology interpretation, mathematical mod-eling, programming, and code review. It constructs solutions through a forward expert-collaboration process and further refines them via backward re-flection based on execution feedback. In our re-production, we largely follow the default setting of the original implementation, including its expert configuration, conductor–reducer workflow, and forward–backward reflection mechanism. 

E.2 Reproduction of OptiMUS 

OptiMUS-0.3 is a modular LLM-based agent sys-tem for formulating and solving linear and mixed-integer linear programming problems from natural-language descriptions. It decomposes the model-ing process into a sequence of stages, including parameter extraction, clause formulation, code gen-eration, code assembly, execution, and debugging, while maintaining an internal state and connection graph to organize the generated model components. In our reproduction, we use OptiMUS-0.3 without enabling its retrieval-augmented generation com-ponent. All other configurations follow the default implementation, including its modular modeling pipeline, error-correction and debugging mecha-nisms. 

E.3 Reproduction of ORMind 

ORMind is a cognitive-inspired end-to-end reason-ing framework for operations research problems. It follows a structured workflow that transforms natural-language requirements into mathematical models and executable solver code through several modules, including a Semantic Encoder, Formal-ization Thinking, an Executive Compiler, a System 2 Reasoner, and a Metacognitive Supervisor. A key feature of ORMind is its use of counterfactual rea-soning to identify potential formulation or imple-mentation errors and refine the generated solution. In our reproduction, we use the default setting of the original implementation, including its module configuration, memory-pool-based workflow, coun-terfactual reasoning mechanism, and syntax-error analysis. 

E.4 Reproduction of ORThought 

ORThought is a structured dual-agent framework for automated optimization modeling. It decom-poses the solving process into two core agents: a Model Agent that performs problem understand-ing, mathematical modeling, and Gurobipy code generation, and a Solve Agent that executes the generated code and refines it through a Detection– Diagnosis–Repair workflow. In our reproduction, we follow the default setting of the original imple-mentation, including its dual-agent architecture, prompt templates, structured reasoning process, and execution-based repair mechanism. No ad-ditional task-specific tuning is performed, and OR-Thought is evaluated under the same problem in-puts and evaluation protocol as other baselines. 

E.5 Reproduction of LEAN-LLM-OPT 

LEAN-LLM-OPT is a lightweight agentic workflow-construction framework for LLM-assisted optimization model auto-formulation. It uses upstream agents to identify the problem type and construct a structured workflow from reference examples, and a downstream model-generation agent follows this workflow to generate the final optimization formulation and executable solver code. The original framework relies on a reference dataset, Ref-Data, to support problem classification and workflow construction, and further incorporates CSV-based data-retrieval tools for large-scale instances with external datasets. In our reproduction, we enable its reference-based workflow construction using Ref-Data and use the W ITHOUT CSV setting, since our evalua-tion inputs do not rely on external CSV files. Apart from this adaptation, we keep its default workflow-construction and model-generation procedure. 

E.6 Reproduction of AlphaOPT 

AlphaOPT is an experience-learning framework for natural-language optimization modeling. In-stead of updating model parameters, it constructs a self-improving experience library of solver-verified modeling insights. Each insight is represented with explicit applicability information, including its tax-onomy, condition, explanation, and example, so that it can be retrieved and reused for later optimiza-tion tasks. AlphaOPT operates through two stages: Library Learning extracts structured insights from failed attempts and organizes them in a hierarchi-cal taxonomy, while Library Evolution refines the applicability conditions of stored insights using ag-gregate evidence across tasks to reduce over- and under-generalization. In its original experimental setup, AlphaOPT per-forms a train-test split on the benchmark. To ensure a fair comparison in our reproduction of AlphaOPT, we use the same training set as our method and ex-pand its experience library from scratch. 

E.7 Reproduction of Trace2Skill 

Trace2Skill is an automatic skill construction and adaptation framework for LLM agents. It distills reusable skills from execution trajectories by first collecting a pool of agent traces, then using parallel success and error analysts to propose trajectory-level skill patches, and finally consolidating these patches into a unified, conflict-free skill directory through hierarchical merging. The resulting skill is used as a declarative artifact without parameter updates or test-time retrieval. For Trace2Skill, we modified part of its prompts to adapt the method to the optimization problem setting. Specifically, we set the maximum agent-loop turns to 12 and used the same training set as our method. 

F Additional Experiments 

F.1 KNN-Based Validation of Embedding-Space Clusterability 

To further validate the discriminative capability of clustered skills and the validity of using archetypes Table 4: KNN retrieval performance comparison between raw problem and archetype representations across multiple ranking metrics. 

Experiment Group Hit@1 Hit@3 Hit@5 Precision@5 Recall@5 MRR MAP@5 

Raw Problem 0.416 0.690 0.8080 0.344 0.430 0.582 0.318 Archetype 0.820 0.939 0.971 0.596 0.745 0.885 0.679 

as the fundamental unit of abstraction, we conduct a K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) validation. We es-tablish a baseline condition in which raw problem texts are directly embedded to obtain representa-tions ˜e, and we compare these against our proposed archetype embeddings e. This experiment assesses the extent to which raw-text embeddings exhibit clusterable structure according to structural simi-larity rather than superficial semantic similarity in the embedding space. We compute the following five metrics: (1) Hit Rate (HR@k) : Whether the top-k neighbors con-tain at least one sample from the same archetype group. (2) Precision@k : The proportion of same-archetype samples among the top-k neighbors. (3) Recall@k : The proportion of same-archetype sam-ples retrieved among all members of that archetype group. (4) Mean Average Precision (MAP) : The mean of average precision scores across all queries. 

(5) Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) : The mean re-ciprocal rank of the first same-archetype neighbor. All metrics range from 0 to 1, with higher val-ues indicating stronger structural consistency and better clusterability in the embedding space. As reported in Table 4, raw-text embeddings ( ˜e) per-form significantly worse than archetype embed-dings ( e), failing to place problems that share the same modeling and solving patterns close to each other. Conversely, archetype-based embeddings achieve substantially higher scores across all KNN metrics, indicating that skills distilled via archetype clustering exhibit clear type-level discriminability. This corroborates the validity of using archetypes as the core abstraction unit for problem representa-tion and skill organization. 

F.2 Analysis of Skill Coverage 

Figure 6 visualizes the archetype-level coverage of the learned skill library. The skill library learned from O PT MATH-T RAIN contains 56 skills and already spans 11 optimization categories, including Network Flow, Assignment & Allocation, Location & Covering, Quadratic & Pairwise Selection, Pro-duction & Inventory, Scheduling, Routing, Knap-56 

> skills
> 17
> 10
> 10
> 4
> 4
> 3
> 3
> Network Flow (17)
> Assignment & Allocation (10)
> Location & Covering (10)
> Quadratic & Pairwise Selection (4)
> Production & Inventory (4)
> Scheduling (3)
> Routing (3)
> Knapsack & Selection (2)
> Packing & Cutting (1)
> Assignment & Matching (1)
> Portfolio & Quadratic Optimization (1)

(a) O PT MATH-T RAIN .93  

> skills
> 21
> 18
> 11
> 11
> 9
> 6
> 4
> 4
> 33
> Assignment & Allocation (21)
> Network Flow (18)
> Location & Covering (11)
> Scheduling (11)
> Routing (9)
> Graph & Tree (6)
> Packing & Cutting (4)
> Production & Inventory (4)
> Quadratic & Pairwise Selection (3)
> Assignment & Matching (3)
> Knapsack & Selection (2)
> Portfolio & Quadratic Optimization (1)

(b) N ANO -CO. 

Figure 6: Skill coverage on problem family. Top: coverage of the skill library learned from O PT MATH-TRAIN . Bottom: coverage after learning on N ANO -CO. 

sack & Selection, and Packing & Cutting. This suggests that the initial library captures a broad set of reusable modeling and solving patterns rather than being dominated by a single problem family. Before evaluating on the OOD NLCO bench-mark, we perform continued skill learning on our synthesized N ANO -CO data. After this stage, the skill library expands to 93 skills and shows stronger coverage of combinatorial optimization structures, especially Assignment & Allocation, Network Flow, Location & Covering, Scheduling, Routing, Graph & Tree, and Packing & Cutting. These categories are highly aligned with the struc-tural characteristics of NLCO. This analysis confirms that O PT SKILLS has strong Skill coverage: the initial library provides broad in-domain archetype coverage, while con-tinued learning on N ANO -CO further extends the library toward OOD combinatorial structures. Since no skills are learned from NLCO itself, the expanded coverage supports the ability of O PT -SKILLS to transfer newly acquired skills to unseen problem distributions. 

F.3 The Scaling Exploration of Skills on OptiBench 

Taking OptiBench as an example, we observe a clear scaling law in solving accuracy as the number of skills expands during training, and the bar chart of this scaling phenomenon is shown in Fig 7. Iter 1 Iter 2 Iter 3 Iter 4 

Skill Number 

> 70
> 72
> 74
> 76
> 78
> 80
> Accuracy (%)
> 74.71
> 74.05
> 75.37
> 77.02

Accuracy vs Skill Number 

> Line Chart
> Bar Chart

Figure 7: The solving accuracy of O PT SKILLS (based on DeepSeek-V3.2) on OptiBench with different num-bers of skills in the skill library. 

F.4 The Usage Statistics of New and Old Skills on NLCO Benchmark 

On the N ANO -CO dataset, O PT SKILLS expands the initial set of 46 existing skills by acquiring 47 new ones. Figure 9 illustrates the utilization patterns of these old and new skills for both suc-cessfully solved and failed instances on the NLCO benchmark. The results demonstrate that the newly acquired skills contribute substantially to perfor-mance on this benchmark. 

F.5 DBSCAN Sensitivity Analysis 

We further evaluate the sensitivity of the archetype construction step to DBSCAN hyperparameters on N ANO -CO. We fix the archetype embedding used in the main experiments and vary the DB-SCAN radius ϵ from 0.01 to 0.15, together with 

min_samples ∈ { 1, 2, 3}. The ground-truth prob-lem types are used only for post-hoc diagnostics and are not used during clustering. Figure 8 reports ARI and Pairwise F1 under dif-ferent hyperparameter settings. Very small ϵ val-ues lead to over-fragmented clusters and near-zero agreement with the problem-type labels. Perfor-mance improves in the moderate range of ϵ, with 0.01                                           

> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> 0.06
> 0.07
> 0.08
> 0.09
> 0.10
> 0.11
> 0.12
> 0.13
> 0.14
> 0.15
> DBSCAN eps
> 1
> 2
> 3
> min_samples
> 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.07 0.25 0.33 0.36 0.26 0.21 0.22 0.23 0.24 0.23 0.04 0.02
> 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.07 0.25 0.33 0.36 0.26 0.21 0.22 0.23 0.24 0.23 0.04 0.02
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.21 0.30 0.35 0.26 0.21 0.22 0.22 0.24 0.23 0.04 0.02
> ARI
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> 0.40

(a) ARI 0.01                                           

> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> 0.06
> 0.07
> 0.08
> 0.09
> 0.10
> 0.11
> 0.12
> 0.13
> 0.14
> 0.15
> DBSCAN eps
> 1
> 2
> 3
> min_samples
> 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.07 0.25 0.34 0.37 0.28 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.25 0.07 0.05
> 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.07 0.25 0.34 0.37 0.28 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.25 0.07 0.05
> 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.21 0.31 0.36 0.27 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.25 0.07 0.05
> Pairwise F1
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> 0.40

(b) Pairwise F1 

Figure 8: DBSCAN sensitivity analysis on N ANO -CO archetype embeddings. The star marks the setting used in our main experiments. 41.2% New Skill Old Skill 58.8% 

(a) The skills usage of the suc-cessful samples. New Skill 

> 30.6%
> Old Skill
> 69.4%

(b) The skills usage of the failed samples. 

Figure 9: The utilization of newly acquired and existing skills across the subsets of correctly solved and failed instances within the NLCO benchmark. 

the best diagnostic scores around ϵ = 0 .07 . Al-though ϵ = 0 .07 gives the best post-hoc diagnos-tic score, we use ϵ = 0 .05 as a more conservative label-free setting to avoid over-merging structurally different archetypes. 

G Case Study 

To make the effect of skill injection more concrete, we include a representative case study in which the task is a cardinality-constrained pairwise selection problem with directed and asymmetric pairwise benefits. We compare a skill-guided trajectory with a no-skill trajectory on the same instance. Fig-ure 10 summarizes the two trajectories and high-lights where the semantic error occurs. Skill-guided trajectory  Correct 127  No-skill trajectory  Incorrect 65              

> INJECTED KNOWLEDGE
> Injected skill fragment.
> Class: Cardinality-Constrained Pairwise Selection.
> Set: P={(i,j): i!=j} , ordered pairs.
> Weight: benefit[(i,j)] is directed/asymmetric.
> Activation: y[(i,j)] = x[i] * x[j] .
> Objective: maximize sum benefit[(i,j)] y[(i,j)] .
> No task-specific skill.
> Only generic modeling guidance is available. The agent receives no explicit warning that the 20-entry benefit table should remain directed/asymmetric.
> REASONING TRACE
> 1. Preserve directed pair set
> P = [(i,j) for i in N for j in N if i != j] maximize sum(benefit[(i,j)] * y[(i,j)] for (i,j) in P)
> 2. Verify against the same objective
> Selected nodes: [1, 2, 3] Total benefit: 127 (1,2)=24, (2,1)=22 (1,3)=17, (3,1)=21 (2,3)=18, (3,2)=25
> Final answer: 127
> 1. Correct solution, then self-doubt
> Selected nodes: [1, 2, 3] Objective value: 127
> The agent treats this as double-counting:
> Total benefit ... 63.5 counts each unordered pair twice
> 2. Optimizes a different problem
> benefit = {(0,1):16, ..., (3,4):17} # only define for i < j Selected nodes: [0, 2, 4] Objective value: 65
> Final answer: 65
> INSIGHT
> Skill effect. The skill stabilizes the semantic choice P={(i,j):i!=j} . The correct set [1,2,3]
> yields 24+22+17+21+18+25=127 .
> Failure mode. The no-skill run finds 127 but changes the task to unordered pairs i<j . The error is modeling semantics, not solver capability.

Figure 10: Case study of skill-guided optimization modeling. A comparison of the skill-guided and no-skill trajectories on the same optimization instance. 

H Prompts 

We provide the detailed prompts below. 

H.1 Prompt of LLM baseline 

PROMPT 

You are a practical function-calling optimization research agent. Follow the 3-stage guidance and rules below to complete the task: ### Modeling and solving the problem step by step 1. **Modeling Stage**: First output a valid formulation in JSON format wrapped in <formulation> tags. 2. **Solving Stage**: Generate the solver-based Python code and wrapped in < solver_code> tags. - you may use the python-based modeling language as follows: ortools , pyomo. - you may use the solver as follows: gurobi, clp, glpk, ipopt, highs, cbc, scip, mindtpy. You need to select an appropriate solver based on the type of the problem (linear or nonlinear, integer or continuous, and so on). - Solver code must print f"RESULT: {{ objective_value}}". ### Problem Description <problem_description> {problem_description} </problem_description> ### Output the result as follows: <formulation> {formulation} </formulation> 

<solver_code> {solver_code} </solver_code> 

H.2 Extractor Prompts 

EXTRACTOR_PROMPT_EVAL 

You are an optimization-structure extractor. Your goal is to ignore surface semantics and recover the underlying optimization structure. Different stories may describe the same mathematical problem class. You must normalize them into the same structural representation whenever the variables, constraints, and objective are essentially the same. You must do two things on the same problem: 1) extract scenario-agnostic optimization keywords into three slots; 2) minimally edit the problem text into a scenario-neutral version. Task A: Keyword extraction - Extract high-signal structural keywords and place them into: - `variable `

- `constraint `

- `objective `

- The goal is not only mathematical correctness, but also discriminative power: the extracted keywords should help distinguish different canonical optimization classes even when their algebraic forms are similar. - The extracted keywords should capture the structural signature of the problem: the decision roles of variables, the coupling mechanisms in constraints, and the operational intent of the objective. - Prefer canonical optimization roles, mechanisms, and structural motifs over generic algebraic descriptions. - Prefer structurally discriminative keywords that best characterize the problem class, rather than the most generic mathematical-form label. - Preserve distinctions between problem classes even when they share similar variable types, linear constraints, or objective form. - If a keyword is needed, use lowercase snake_case and keep it scenario-agnostic. - Use generic keywords such as variable type, linear equality/inequality, or lower/upper bound only when they add meaningful structural information or when no more specific structural keyword applies. - Do not include a generic algebraic keyword when it is already implied by a more specific structural keyword, unless the generic keyword adds distinct information. - For the `objective ` slot, prefer keywords describing optimization intent, cost structure, or performance criterion over keywords describing only algebraic form. - Do not output narrative entities unless they represent canonical optimization structure. - Avoid redundant near-synonyms, overly broad labels, or multiple generic keywords when a more specific structural keyword better captures the optimization pattern. Keyword list reference for inference: <keywords_list> {keywords_list} </keywords_list> When extracting keywords, prioritize canonical tokens from this list when they are semantically appropriate to the problem. Do not force a token from the list if none is a good fit. Task B: Minimal scenario-neutral edit - Produce `edited_problem ` by preserving the original problem structure as much as possible. - Keep mathematical meaning, quantities, equations/inequalities, and logical relations unchanged. - Replace scenario-specific nouns/ entities with generic placeholders where needed (for example: `entity_A 

`, `resource_i `, `task_j `). - Do NOT simplify the optimization structure. - Do NOT reorder, delete, or add constraints/objectives. - Do not delete information. - Do not summarize. - Edit all scenario-specific background narratives, even if they carry no mathematical content. - Keep this as a minimal edit not a paraphrase rewrite. Confidence - Return a confidence score in [0,1] for keyword extraction quality. - 0.8-1.0: Keywords are structurally accurate, scenario-agnostic, and clearly discriminative for the problem class; - 0.5-0.7: Most keywords are relevant, but some are generic or a few important structural distinctions are underspecified; - 0.2-0.4: Some keywords are relevant but require more inference, or important discriminative structure is missing; 

- 0.0-0.1: Few or no clear keywords can be extracted. Problem description to analyze: <problem_description> {problem_description} </problem_description> Output JSON only: {{ "keywords": {{ "variable": ["string"], "constraint": ["string"], "objective": ["string"] }}, "edited_problem": "string", "confidence": 0.0 }} Output constraints: - Include all three keyword slots ( `

variable `, `constraint `, `objective `), each as an array (can be empty). - `edited_problem ` must be non-empty plain text. - No extra keys. - The confidence score is a float between 0.0 and 1.0. - Return only JSON, no markdown/code fence/explanation. 

EXTRACTOR_PROMPT 

You are an optimization-structure extractor. Your goal is to ignore surface semantics and recover the underlying optimization structure. Different stories may describe the same mathematical problem class. You must normalize them into the same structural representation whenever the variables, constraints, and objective are essentially the same. You must do two things on the same problem: 1) extract scenario-agnostic optimization keywords into three slots; 2) minimally edit the problem text into a scenario-neutral version. Task A: Keyword extraction - Extract high-signal structural keywords and place them into: - `variable `

- `constraint `

- `objective `

- The goal is not only mathematical correctness, but also discriminative power: the extracted keywords should help distinguish different canonical optimization classes even when their algebraic forms are similar. - The extracted keywords should capture the structural signature of the problem: the decision roles of variables, the coupling mechanisms in constraints, and the operational intent of the objective. - Prefer canonical optimization roles, mechanisms, and structural motifs over generic algebraic descriptions. - Prefer structurally discriminative keywords that best characterize the problem class, rather than the most generic mathematical-form label. - Preserve distinctions between problem classes even when they share similar variable types, linear constraints, or objective form. - If a keyword is needed, use lowercase snake_case and keep it scenario-agnostic. - Use generic keywords such as variable type, linear equality/inequality, or lower/upper bound only when they add meaningful structural information or when no more specific structural keyword applies. - Do not include a generic algebraic keyword when it is already implied by a more specific structural keyword, unless the generic keyword adds distinct information. - For the `objective ` slot, prefer keywords describing optimization intent, cost structure, or performance criterion over keywords describing only algebraic form. - Do not output narrative entities unless they represent canonical optimization structure. - Avoid redundant near-synonyms, overly broad labels, or multiple generic keywords when a more specific structural keyword better captures the optimization pattern. Task B: Minimal scenario-neutral edit - Produce `edited_problem ` by preserving the original problem structure as much as possible. - Keep mathematical meaning, quantities, equations/inequalities, and logical relations unchanged. - Replace scenario-specific nouns/ entities with generic placeholders where needed (for example: `entity_A 

`, `resource_i `, `task_j `). - Do NOT simplify the optimization structure. - Do NOT reorder, delete, or add constraints/objectives. - Do not delete information. - Do not summarize. - Edit all scenario-specific background narratives, even if they carry no mathematical content. - Keep this as a minimal edit not a paraphrase rewrite. Confidence 

- Return a confidence score in [0,1] for keyword extraction quality. - 0.8-1.0: Keywords are structurally accurate, scenario-agnostic, and clearly discriminative for the problem class; - 0.5-0.7: Most keywords are relevant, but some are generic or a few important structural distinctions are underspecified; - 0.2-0.4: Some keywords are relevant but require more inference, or important discriminative structure is missing; - 0.0-0.1: Few or no clear keywords can be extracted. Problem description to analyze: <problem_description> {problem_description} </problem_description> Output JSON only: {{ "keywords": {{ "variable": ["string"], "constraint": ["string"], "objective": ["string"] }}, "edited_problem": "string", "confidence": 0.0 }} Output constraints: - Include all three keyword slots ( `

variable `, `constraint `, `objective `), each as an array (can be empty). - `edited_problem ` must be non-empty plain text. - No extra keys. - The confidence score is a float between 0.0 and 1.0. - Return only JSON, no markdown/code fence/explanation. 

H.3 Executor Prompts 

EXECUTOR_SYSTEM_PROMPT 

You are a practical function-calling optimization research agent. Follow the 3-stage guidance and rules below to complete the task: ### 3-Stage Guidance 1. **Modeling Stage**: First output a valid formulation in JSON format wrapped in <formulation> tags. 2. **Solving Stage**: Call the `run_code `

tool to execute solver code. Ensure tool arguments are valid JSON. 3. **Final Stage**: Output the final numeric answer wrapped in <answer> tags. ### Core Rules - At most one tool call per turn. - Solver code must print `RESULT:<number >`.- Never assume tool success without checking feedback. - Select exactly one workflow from the skill (parallel alternatives, not sequential steps). - Before any tool call, output: < formulation>{...valid JSON...}</ formulation> - After observing a valid numeric tool result, record the current best numeric candidate at the end of your assistant reply as <tmp>number</tmp>; <tmp> is temporary and does not terminate the task. - If the tool output clearly reports the requested objective value in plain text but forgot to print RESULT:< number>, you may record that objective value as <tmp>number</tmp>; do not use <tmp> for infeasible, unknown, timeout, failed, or ambiguous outputs. - If the tool output this turn gives the same numeric value, or reports an error, infeasible, unknown, timeout, or failed status, keep the previous < tmp>number</tmp> unchanged instead of clearing or replacing it. - Final output must be numeric-only: < answer>number</answer> - Only <answer>...</answer> can terminate the task; any intermediate JSON, < formulation>, or <tmp> is not final. ### Termination Guidance - If the obtained result is the optimal value and conforms to the problem statement and the formulation, immediately output the final answer. - If the obtained result is problematic or the `run_code ` tool does not receive correct feedback, continue the process. - If a feasible result is obtained but it is uncertain whether it is optimal, a verification tool call may be performed. If the verification is successful, immediately output the final answer; if there is a problem, continue the process. ### Task Context <keywords> {keywords} </keywords> <skill> {skill} </skill> 

EXECUTOR_USER_PROMPT 

### Task Description <problem_description> {problem_description} </problem_description> 

H.4 Solver Selection Prompts 

SOLVER_SELECTION_PROMPT 

You are selecting python solver library and backend combinations for optimization tasks. Task: - Choose top-k candidates from the provided solver catalog. - Use problem description + structured keyword slots. - Prefer backends that are likely to be available and stable. - Catalog only contains framework/backend identifiers; detailed docs are loaded after selection. Selection principles: 1. Infer problem family from objective/ constraint keywords. 2. Prefer robust and standard backends when uncertain. 3. Keep diversity across frameworks/ backends when possible. 4. Do not invent solver IDs; choose only from catalog. Input: <problem_description> {problem_description} </problem_description> <keywords> {keywords} </keywords> <top_k> {top_k} </top_k> <solver_catalog_json> {solver_catalog} </solver_catalog_json> Return JSON only: {{ "selected": [ {{ "solver_id": "string", "reason": "short reason" }} ]}} H.5 Skill Prompts 

SKILL_SELECTION_PROMPT_EVAL 

You are a skill selector used for skill routing. Route the most suitable skill for the current problem. Your task: - Select exactly one skill from the provided candidate list. - You must choose only from the candidate 

`skill_id ` values provided below. - You must rely only on the candidate skill `name ` and `description `.- Do not use hidden assumptions about the full skill content. - Do not invent a new skill. Problem structure signals: <keywords> {keywords} </keywords> Scenario-neutral edited problem: <edited_problem> {edited_problem} </edited_problem> Candidate skills for the current active state: <skill_candidates_json> {skill_candidates_json} </skill_candidates_json> Return JSON only in this exact schema: {{ "skill_id": "string", "reason": "string", "confidence": 0.0 }} Output constraints: - `skill_id ` must exactly match one candidate `skill_id `.- `reason ` must be brief and grounded in the provided keywords / edited problem / descriptions. - `confidence ` must be a float in [0.0, 1.0]. - No markdown, no code fence, no extra keys, no extra text. 

SKILL_SELECTION_PROMPT 

You are a conservative Operations Research skill selector used for online self-learning skill routing. Your task: - Decide whether an existing reusable skill is suitable for the current problem. - If a suitable skill exists, select exactly one skill from the provided candidate list. 

- If no candidate is structurally suitable, reject retrieval. - You must choose only from the candidate 

`skill_id ` values provided below when `decision ` is `recall `.- You must rely only on the candidate skill `name ` and `description `.- Do not use hidden assumptions about the full skill content. - Do not invent a new skill. Reject when: - the candidate belongs to a different canonical optimization family, - the current problem and candidate are not the same canonical optimization type, - the core modeling structure, decision-variable pattern, objective, or constraint mechanism does not match, - the match is based only on superficial keyword overlap, - candidate descriptions are too generic to justify reuse, - or you are uncertain that the selected skill is reusable for this problem. Recall only when: - the current problem and selected candidate strictly and clearly describe the same canonical optimization type, - and the candidate description covers the current problem 's core variable semantics, constraint mechanism, and objective semantics. Strict decision policy: - Trust your own structural judgment even when all candidates look imperfect. - Do not force a recall just because a candidate is the closest available option. - Do not recall a skill that would require adapting its canonical formulation to a different problem type. - Reusable means directly applicable at the canonical type level, not merely adaptable. - Be careful with problems that look similar at the surface level; similar keywords do not by themselves mean the same canonical optimization type. - If the exact canonical type is not represented by any candidate description, choose `reject `.Problem structure signals: <keywords> {keywords} </keywords> Scenario-neutral edited problem: <edited_problem> {edited_problem} </edited_problem> Candidate skills for the current active state: <skill_candidates_json> {skill_candidates_json} </skill_candidates_json> Return JSON only in this exact schema: {{ "decision": "recall", "skill_id": "string", "reason": "string", "confidence": 0.0 }} Output constraints: - `decision ` must be exactly `recall ` or 

`reject `.- If `decision ` is `recall `, `skill_id `

must exactly match one candidate `

skill_id `.- If `decision ` is `reject `, `skill_id `

must be an empty string. - `reason ` must be brief and grounded in the provided keywords / edited problem / descriptions. - `confidence ` must be a float in [0.0, 1.0]. - No markdown, no code fence, no extra keys, no extra text. 

SKILL_SELECTION_PROMPT_JUDGE 

You are a conservative Operations Research skill selector used for learning-stage skill routing. Your task: - Decide whether an existing reusable skill is suitable for the current problem. - If a suitable skill exists, reuse exactly one skill from the provided candidate list. - If no candidate is structurally suitable, route to new skill construction. - You must choose only from the candidate 

`skill_id ` values provided below when `decision ` is `reuse `.- You must rely only on the candidate skill `name ` and `description `.- Do not use hidden assumptions about the full skill content. - Do not invent a new skill. Reject when: - the candidate belongs to a different canonical optimization family, - the current problem and candidate are not the same canonical optimization type, - the core modeling structure, decision-variable pattern, objective, or constraint mechanism does not match, - the match is based only on superficial keyword overlap, 

- candidate descriptions are too generic to justify reuse, - or you are uncertain that the selected skill is reusable for this problem. Reuse only when: - the current problem and selected candidate strictly and clearly describe the same canonical optimization type, - and the candidate description covers the current problem 's core variable semantics, constraint mechanism, and objective semantics. Strict decision policy: - Trust your own structural judgment even when all candidates look imperfect. - Do not force reuse just because a candidate is the closest available option. - Do not reuse a skill that would require adapting its canonical formulation to a different problem type. - Reusable means directly applicable at the canonical type level, not merely adaptable. - Be careful with problems that look similar at the surface level; similar keywords do not by themselves mean the same canonical optimization type. - If the exact canonical type is not represented by any candidate description, choose `new `.Problem structure signals: <keywords> {keywords} </keywords> Scenario-neutral edited problem: <edited_problem> {edited_problem} </edited_problem> Candidate skills for the current active state: <skill_candidates_json> {skill_candidates_json} </skill_candidates_json> Return JSON only in this exact schema: {{ "decision": "reuse", "skill_id": "string", "reason": "string", "confidence": 0.0 }} Output constraints: - `decision ` must be exactly `reuse ` or `

new `.- If `decision ` is `reuse `, `skill_id `

must exactly match one candidate `

skill_id `.- If `decision ` is `new `, `skill_id ` must be an empty string. - `reason ` must be brief and grounded in the provided keywords / edited problem / descriptions. - `confidence ` must be a float in [0.0, 1.0]. - No markdown, no code fence, no extra keys, no extra text. 

SKILL_ANALYSIS_PROMPT 

You are an operations research trajectory analyst. Your goal is to generate reusable Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for OR skill construction. Your core task is to analyze exactly one rollout trajectory, and output reusable guidance in markdown blocks based on objective metrics. Next, refer to the relevant keywords: <keywords> {keywords} </keywords> Next, refer to Objective Indicators <Indicators> {Indicators} </Indicators> Now, analyze the candidate data: <trajectory> {trajectory} </trajectory> Your output must be a single JSON object following this schema: {"positive_sop": "### Modeling\\n- ...\\ n\\n### Solving\\n- ...", "should_avoid": " " }Adhere to these output constraints: - If `label ` is "positive", `positive_sop 

` must be non-empty with sections "### Modeling" followed by "### Solving", containing reusable, scenario-agnostic bullet points. Set 

`should_avoid ` to an empty string. - If `label ` is "negative", `should_avoid 

` must be non-empty, containing reusable, scenario-agnostic bullet points. Set `positive_sop ` to an empty string. - Do not include any text outside the JSON object. - Keep It General: The skill should apply to similar problems, not just this one. - Capture Executable Knowledge: When the trajectory includes effective code, extract the core logic as a reusable template. Good code templates are worth more than paragraphs of description. 

- Brevity Matters: Aim for ~600 words. Focus on what 's actionable. 

BUILD_SKILL_PROMPT 

You are an OR Skill Builder that writes workflow-oriented SKILL documents for long-term reuse. Mission: - Build one polished SKILL markdown from problem context and per-candidate analyses. - The result must guide another model from formulation to executable solving code. - Keep it practical, technically precise, and transferable. - Follow the output template as a strict structural schema: do not add, remove , rename, reorder, or reformat any required section, heading level, or YAML frontmatter delimiter. Design principles: 1. Distill lessons, do not narrate trajectory. 2. Keep workflow alternatives parallel ( not sequential). 3. Use solver-aware modeling templates. 4. Make result parsing and failure handling explicit. 5. Prefer concise technical clarity over decorative prose. 6. Suitable code usage can be placed in every step with explicit comments. 7. Keep it general,Use placeholders instead of specific values. The skill should apply to similar problems, not just this one, not just this scenario. The Skill Name, Skill Description, Workflow Names, Step Names should all be generalized and not scenario-specific. Hard format contract: - Keep this section order exactly: frontmatter -> # Workflow 1 (...) -> ## Modeling stage -> ## Solving stage -> # Workflow 2 (...) -> ## Modeling stage -> ## Solving stage - Do not add extra top-level sections. - Do not output explanatory text outside the markdown. Input: <keywords> {keywords} </keywords> <candidate_analyses_json> {candidate_analyses} </candidate_analyses_json> Candidate analyses schema contract: - Each item contains: - `candidate_id ` (controller-provided identifier) - `label ` (`positive ` or `negative `)- `positive_sop ` (markdown with `### Modeling ` and `### Solving `)- `should_avoid ` (markdown with `### Should Avoid `)- Build skill content mainly from: - positive examples: `positive_sop `

- negative examples: `should_avoid `

- Do not assume legacy fields such as `

decision_basis `, `summary `, or nested step arrays. Output markdown template (SKILL.md content only): ---name: [skill_name] description: | [One sentence covering both modeling and solving behavior.] ---# Workflow 1 ([workflow_name]) ## Modeling stage ### Strategy Overview [Short paragraph.] ### Step 1 - [Model Step Name] - [Action] - [Action] ### Step 2 - [Model Step Name] - [Action] - [Action] ### Step ... ### Formulation Template 

``` json {"sets": [], "parameters": [], "decision_variables": [], "objective": { "sense": "min", "expression": "" }, "constraints": [] }

``` 

### Common Pitfalls - [Pitfall] - [Pitfall] ## Solving stage ### Strategy Overview [Short paragraph.] ### Step 1 - [Solver Step Name] - [Action] 

- [Action] ### Step 2 - [Solver Step Name] - [Action] - [Action] ### Step ... ### Code Usage 

``` python # build model from formulation # solve with status / termination checks 

``` 

### Common Pitfalls - [Pitfall] - [Pitfall] # Workflow 2 ([workflow_name]) ## Modeling stage ### Strategy Overview [Short paragraph.] ### Step 1 - [Model Step Name] - [Action] - [Action] ### Step 2 - [Model Step Name] - [Action] - [Action] ### Step ... ### Formulation Template 

``` json {"sets": [], "parameters": [], "decision_variables": [], "objective": { "sense": "min", "expression": "" }, "constraints": [] }

``` 

### Common Pitfalls - [Pitfall] - [Pitfall] ## Solving stage ### Strategy Overview [Short paragraph.] ### Step 1 - [Solver Step Name] - [Action] - [Action] ### Step 2 - [Solver Step Name] - [Action] - [Action] ### Step ... ### Code Usage 

``` python # build model from formulation # solve with status / termination checks 

``` 

### Common Pitfalls - [Pitfall] - [Pitfall] Quality bar: - Workflows must be meaningfully different (backend/solver/API style). - Avoid copy-paste duplication between Workflows. - Keep placeholders generic and executable. - Output starts with `---` and ends at markdown body. 

REFINE_SKILL_PROMPT 

You are a Skill Optimization Specialist. Your core task is to refine an existing operations research SKILL using one completed trajectory analysis and the current skill content, with the goals of improving the skill 's effectiveness, preserving its reusable workflow quality, removing redundancy, generalizing specific cases, and enhancing structure. Your goals are to: - improve the SKILL 's effectiveness, - preserve and strengthen reusable workflow quality, - remove redundancy, - generalize only what is truly reusable, - and maintain a stable, executable structure. Core Execution Rules: - Use the `<label> ` as the supervision signal: - If `label ` is `positive `: strengthen or clarify successful reusable procedures supported by the `<skill_analysis> `.- If `label ` is `negative `: add or strengthen prerequisite checks, early warning signals, failure guards, and fallback guidance supported by the 

`<skill_analysis> `.- Apply only the smallest set of edits justified by the trajectory analysis. - Do not infer broad behavioral changes from a single narrow case. - Preserve the SKILL 's identity: do not over-generalize it into a broader template that weakens its intended optimization problem class, solver assumptions, modeling pattern, or retrieval specificity. 

Input: <skill> {skill} </skill> <skill_analysis> {skill_analysis} </skill_analysis> <label> {label} </label> Refinement Constraints (Strictly Follow): 1. Preserve the outer document skeleton exactly: - keep the full YAML frontmatter, - keep both opening and closing `---`,- keep all existing YAML keys, - keep key order unchanged, - keep the top-level section structure and heading order unchanged unless explicitly impossible to maintain validity. 2. Within existing sections, you may rewrite, compress, deduplicate, clarify, and generalize content. Prefer local edits over full rewrites .3. Preserve all useful existing workflows. Remove only weak, vague, repetitive, or redundant wording. 4. Do not remove explicit execution checks, solver/status verification steps, or parseable output contracts. You may clarify or tighten them if supported by the trajectory. 5. Exclude scenario-specific story details from the analysis, such as names, one-time events, or incidental numeric values, unless they represent a reusable operational threshold or rule. 6. Replace overly specific examples with reusable patterns when possible. Convert hardcoded task-specific values into placeholders such as `[TARGET] `, `[QUERY] `, `[TIME_LIMIT] `,

`[CAPACITY] `, or similar appropriate abstractions. 7. Preserve skill-discriminative information. Do not remove or blur details that define this SKILL 'sdistinctive optimization structure, including when relevant: - problem class, - decision variable pattern, - objective type, - key constraint structure, - solver or modeling assumptions. 8. Merge duplicate or near-duplicate content only when meaning is preserved. Consolidate overlapping explanations into clearer single statements. 9. For `positive ` labels: - strengthen successful SOPs supported by the analysis, - clarify reusable step order, - make successful checks, thresholds, or decision criteria more explicit, - do not add unsupported new methods or techniques. 10. For `negative ` labels: - prioritize prerequisite checks, early failure detection, recovery steps, and fallback guidance, - do not ban a method entirely unless the analysis clearly shows a general failure mode rather than a one-off execution issue, - do not overwrite or weaken proven successful workflows unless the analysis reveals a general flaw in them. 11. Do not introduce new solver strategies, modeling tricks, tools, or procedures unless they are clearly supported by either the existing SKILL or the trajectory. 12. Keep the content concise, actionable, and reusable. Remove verbosity that does not improve execution quality. 13. Maintain consistent formatting and scannability within the existing structure: - clear steps, - consistent bullet style, - concise wording, - no unnecessary prose expansion. 14. Perform a consistency audit across prose, formulation templates, and code examples: - ensure sign conventions, index ordering, objective sense, constraint direction, and variable semantics are mutually consistent, - if a contradiction exists, prefer the smallest edit that restores internal consistency, - do not preserve contradictory formulations merely to minimize edits .Refinement Principles: - Prefer minimal, evidence-based edits - Generalize reusable patterns, not incidental details - Preserve what makes the SKILL specifically useful - Add safeguards carefully and only when justified 

- Keep the SKILL executable, clear, and retrieval-distinctive Output: - Return only refined SKILL markdown, starting at the frontmatter ( `---`). - Do not output JSON. - Do not output explanatory text. - Do not wrap the answer in code fences.