Title: ExaModels.jl: an Algebraic Modeling System for Nonlinear Programming on GPUs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.16265v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 02:20:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 101

Markdown Content:
# ExaModels.jl: an Algebraic Modeling System for Nonlinear Programming on GPUs 

## Sungho Shin ∗, Michel Schanen ‡, Fran¸ cois Pacaud †,‡,Alexis Montoison ¶, Mihai Anitescu ‡,§

> ∗

Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

> †

MINES Paris - PSL 

> ‡

Mathematics and Computer Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory 

> ¶

AMD 

> §

Department of Statistics, University of Chicago 

Abstract 

Large-scale nonlinear programs almost always exhibit partially separable and repetitive structure, yet most existing algebraic modeling systems do not take advantage of it. A nonlinear optimization solver queries the objective, the constraints, and their derivatives at every iteration, so the speed of these evaluations bears directly on the overall solution time. We present ExaModels.jl, a Julia-based algebraic modeling system that exploits this structure to evaluate the objective, the constraints, and their derivatives in parallel. At its core is a single-instruction, multiple-data abstraction that represents a nonlinear program as a small number of algebraic patterns, each repeated over many data points. Because the patterns are visible at compile time, a specialized model and derivative evaluation kernel is compiled for each pattern. Applying that kernel independently across the data points maps naturally onto GPU parallelism and, with sufficiently many threads, yields O(1) evaluation time regardless of the number of data points. On the largest instances of the Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek library, GPU execution speeds up sparse Hessian evaluation by 76 × over single-threaded CPU evaluation, and by 30 × on COPS and 7 .3× on PGLIB-OPF. 

Keywords: algebraic modeling system, automatic differentiation, nonlinear programming, parallel computing, GPU computing, Julia 

# 1 Introduction 

Large-scale nonlinear programs (NLPs) arising in engineering, statistics, and scientific applications almost always exhibit partially separable and repetitive structure (Griewank and Toint, 1982). The objective and constraints are sums or stacks of scalar terms, and the same algebraic pattern appears across many data points. To solve an NLP, the solver evaluates the NLP functions at each iteration: the objective and constraint values, together with their first- and second-order derivatives (the gradient, the constraint Jacobian, and the Lagrangian Hessian). The speed of these evaluations therefore governs the performance of the solution procedure. Exploiting the partially separable, repetitive structure is the key to making them fast. This paper presents a modeling abstraction, an automatic differentiation (AD) algorithm, and their software implementation in ExaModels.jl that exploit this structure for scalable NLP function evaluation and graphics processing unit (GPU) acceleration. To make this concrete, consider the Goddard rocket problem (Goddard, 1919) from the COPS benchmark 

1arXiv:2608.16265v1 [math.OC] 17 Aug 2026 suite (Dolan and Mor´ e, 2001), discretized via the trapezoidal rule with T time steps: max  

> ht, v t, m t,τt,∆t

hT (1a) s.t. ht = ht−1 + ∆t

2 (vt + vt−1), t = 1 , . . . , T, (1b) 

vt = vt−1 + ∆t

2

 τt − D(ht, v t)

mt

− g(ht) + τt−1 − D(ht−1, v t−1)

mt−1

− g(ht−1)



, t = 1 , . . . , T, (1c) 

mt = mt−1 − ∆t

2c (τt + τt−1), t = 1 , . . . , T, (1d) 

h0 = h0, v 0 = 0 , m 0 = m0, m T = mf , (1e) where ht, vt, mt, and τt are the altitude, velocity, mass, and thrust at time t, and ∆ t is the time step, itself a decision variable. The aerodynamic drag is D(h, v ) = Dcv2e−hc(h−h0)/h 0

, and the gravitational acceleration is g(h) = g0(h0/h )2. The given constants h0, m0, mf , c, Dc, hc, and g0 are the initial altitude, the initial mass, the final mass, the exhaust velocity, the two drag parameters, and the gravitational acceleration at the initial altitude. The problem aims to maximize the final altitude of a vertically ascending rocket subject to aerodynamic drag and gravity. This is a classical optimal control problem representative of the discretize-then-optimize approach widely used in trajectory optimization (Betts, 2010; Biegler, 2010). The NLP function evaluations of this problem can be naturally represented as iterators . For example, consider the altitude dynamics (1b). The algebraic expression ht − ht−1 − ∆t 

> 2

(vt + vt−1) = 0 has the same functional form for every t = 1 , . . . , T , and only the variable indices change. The same holds for the velocity dynamics (1c) and the mass dynamics (1d). The repetition applies not only to the functions themselves but also to their derivatives. The partial derivatives of each pattern with respect to its variables again share a single functional form across t, with only the variable indices changing. In ExaModels.jl, the modeling system developed in this paper, the constraint is written in the same form, as an algebraic pattern paired with an iterator:  

> 1

@add_con(core, h[t] - h[t-1] - 0.5 * dt[1] * (v[t] + v[t-1]) for t = 1:T) 

where core is the model object under construction, and h, v, and dt are variable blocks declared beforehand. Because the data iterator is part of the modeling syntax, the model object receives the algebraic pattern and the data points separately. The repetitive structure is therefore visible without any analysis: each constraint type defines a single algebraic pattern, and the time indices t = 1 , . . . , T are the data points over which that pattern is evaluated. Evaluating the constraint function or its derivatives then reduces to the construction of a for loop over t for each pattern, and these loops are embarrassingly parallel across data points. Aconsequence is that when the discretization is refined, the problem size grows proportionally in T , but the number of distinct algebraic patterns remains fixed at five: the objective, the three dynamics constraints (1b)–(1d), and one singleton pattern that collects the four initial and final conditions. In particular, with sufficiently many parallel threads, the evaluation time of the NLP functions remains constant as T grows. By contrast, the constraints could be written out one by one, calling @add con once per t inside an ordinary loop. Each call would create a separate scalar constraint, and unless a pattern-matching procedure were applied internally, the structured, repetitive constraints would be unrolled into a flat list. The benefits described above would then become much more difficult to realize. This partially separable, repetitive algebraic structure is not specific to the Goddard rocket problem in (1). Every problem category of the COPS benchmark, optimal control, PDE-constrained optimization, parameter estimation with collocation, and mesh and shape optimization, carries a small, fixed number of algebraic patterns, with the problem size scaling in the discretization resolution (Dolan and Mor´ e, 2001). The alternating current optimal power flow (ACOPF) problem (Carpentier, 1962), one of the most widely studied NLPs in power systems, can be expressed with only 15 distinct algebraic patterns, regardless of whether the network contains hundreds or tens of thousands of buses (Shin, Anitescu, and Pacaud, 2024). More broadly, large-scale NLPs across application domains, such as partial differential equation (PDE)-constrained 

2optimization (Biegler et al., 2003), optimal control, network design, and maximum likelihood estimation, routinely involve millions of variables and constraints. Their mathematical formulations still fit on at most a few pages, because the same algebraic expressions are repeated over spatial nodes, time steps, scenarios, or data samples. The problem size is driven by the number of data points, not the number of distinct algebraic patterns .A modeling system must therefore let the user write the model in a form that preserves the pattern–data separation. When this separation is maintained, each algebraic pattern needs to be analyzed only once, and the specialized model and derivative evaluation kernels compiled for it can then be applied across all data points. The sparsity analysis is likewise performed per pattern: the derivative sparsity is determined once for the pattern and replicated across its data points. Furthermore, because the same instruction, the pattern’s kernel, is applied independently to many data points, the evaluation maps naturally onto the single-instruction, multiple-data (SIMD) paradigm of parallel computing. With a sufficient number of threads, the NLP functions can in principle be evaluated in O(1) time regardless of the number of data points, effectively removing the AD computation from the overall NLP solution time. Such parallel evaluation also allows the NLP functions to be evaluated directly on GPUs. Moreover, with the recent progress in nonlinear optimization solvers on GPUs (Shin, Pacaud, and Montoison, 2025; Pacaud, Shin, et al., 2024), this enables a fully GPU-resident solution framework in which the AD, the linear algebra, and the solver all remain in device memory, eliminating host–device data transfer overhead. This observation motivates the following question: 

What modeling abstraction preserves the pattern–data separation of large-scale NLPs, and how can it be harnessed for efficient, parallel evaluation of the NLP functions? 

In answer to this question, we introduce a SIMD abstraction for NLPs, which represents the problem as a small number of algebraic patterns, each paired with an iterator over its data points, together with an AD scheme specialized to this structured algebraic information. The abstraction is slightly more restrictive than general-purpose modeling interfaces: the user is required to express the model in a structured form, where each objective term and constraint is specified as an algebraic pattern paired with a data iterator. This is a deliberate design choice: by asking the user to expose the parallelizable structure of their problem, the modeling system can exploit it for efficient derivative evaluation. Each pattern is represented by a 

parameterized expression tree : a tree of operations that encodes the algebraic pattern and is parameterized by the problem data supplied at evaluation time. Because each pattern is fixed and only the data varies, a single derivative evaluation kernel per pattern suffices, executed across all of its data points in a SIMD fashion. This SIMD execution model corresponds directly to that of GPUs, which is what enables GPU acceleration for large-scale NLPs. Furthermore, the parameterized expression tree, the data structure realizing this abstraction, can also be exploited in sparse AD, for which we implement a coloring-free, element-wise sparse reverse-mode algorithm. The sparsity pattern is analyzed at the level of the individual parameterized expression tree at model-construction time, and the sparse Jacobian and Lagrangian Hessian are stored in a partially compressed 

coordinate (COO) format, in which each derivative contribution is written element-wise to a precomputed position. This structure removes the possibility of race conditions under parallel execution without incurring excessive fill-in in the sparse matrices. Everything described above is implemented in ExaModels.jl, an open-source Julia package. The implementation encodes the algebraic patterns in the type system of Julia, so the full algebraic structure is visible to the compiler and each evaluation kernel is compiled as pattern-specialized code. This compile-time visibility supports ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation without a separate code-generation step: the same code that runs under just-in-time (JIT) compilation is compiled into standalone binaries or shared libraries, with no overhead in the iterative evaluation. The pattern-specialized expression tree is furthermore a bits type, so the same kernels run on GPUs. Through KernelAbstractions.jl (Churavy, 2025), a single kernel definition dispatches to NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, and Apple GPUs, as well as to multithreaded central processing units (CPUs), providing cross-platform portability from one implementation. The implementation additionally provides a range of features: the same model code runs in arbitrary 

3numeric precision, including software-emulated extended precision; user-defined functions can be registered together with their derivatives; and every model supports, by default, parametric and two-stage stochastic formulations, as well as user-defined external oracles, each attached to a block of variables and constraints; batch formulations are under active development (Section 7.4.3). 

## 1.1 Related Work 

ExaModels.jl is an algebraic modeling system (AMS) whose distinguishing capability lies in its AD implemen-tation. The relevant prior work therefore spans two areas: algebraic modeling, and AD together with its implementation paradigms. At their intersection sit the AMSs that support NLPs and ship their own AD, with which ExaModels.jl directly competes. 

1.1.1 Algebraic Modeling Systems 

An AMS is a software system that lets the user state an optimization problem in a high-level syntax mirroring its algebraic (mathematical) form; well-known examples include AMPL (Fourer, Gay, and Kernighan, 1990), GAMS (Bussieck and Meeraus, 2004), JuMP (Lubin, Dowson, et al., 2023), Pyomo (Hart, Watson, and Woodruff, 2011), and CVXPY (Diamond and Boyd, 2016). It sits between the user’s formulation and the numerical solver, and produces from the stated problem what the solver requires. Historically, AMSs began as standalone domain-specific languages: systems such as AMPL and GAMS define their own syntax, parse it with their own front ends, and exchange problems through their own formats. Over time, the field has moved toward libraries embedded in high-level general-purpose languages, such as JuMP in Julia, Pyomo and CVXPY in Python, and CasADi with interfaces to both Python and MATLAB, so that models are ordinary programs with access to the host language’s data structures, tooling, and ecosystem. The two approaches can also be combined: a standalone system can serve as the backend of an embedded library, as Pyomo does by serializing models to AMPL’s .nl format and obtaining derivatives from AMPL Solver Library (ASL) (Hart, Laird, et al., 2017). ExaModels.jl belongs to the embedded category. It is implemented in Julia and relies on the Julia compiler for its AD capabilities, with no direct source code transformation. The embedding also exposes models to the solver infrastructure, data analysis, and visualization tooling available in the Julia ecosystem. AMSs play a particularly important role in nonlinear programming. For linear, quadratic, and disciplined convex programs (DCPs), what the solver requires is a fixed set of problem data that it reads once. For a linear program, for example, it consists of the cost vector, the constraint matrix, and the bound vectors of the canonical form. For NLPs, by contrast, there is no such finite representation. Instead of an explicit encoding of the constraints and objective, the AMS supplies the NLP functions as lazily evaluated callbacks, exposed to the solver as function pointers and queried at each iterate it visits. Since these callbacks include the first- and second-order derivatives, derivative evaluation is an essential part of NLP modeling. Some AMSs implement their own derivative evaluation, while others delegate it to external tooling. ExaModels.jl belongs to the former group: it is not a solver but an AMS that provides the modeling interface and the callback functions, backed by its own AD capabilities. 

1.1.2 Automatic Differentiation and Its Implementation Paradigms 

Derivatives of computer programs can be evaluated in several different ways: by hand-written derivative evaluation code, by finite differences, by symbolic differentiation, or by AD. Hand-written derivatives are laborious and error-prone for large models. Finite differences suffer from truncation error and require one perturbed evaluation per input, and symbolic differentiation suffers from expression swell (Baydin et al., 2018). AD avoids these drawbacks by applying the chain rule to each elementary operation of the program. It yields derivatives exact up to numerical precision at a cost proportional to the function evaluation itself, and it has become the standard tool for derivative computation in numerical computing whenever it is applicable (Griewank and Walther, 2008; Naumann, 2012). A few systems use symbolic differentiation instead, such as Gravity (Hijazi, Wang, and Coffrin, 2018) and the SymbolicAD backend of JuMP (Dowson and Schanen, 2022). The choice is justified by the fact that many algebraic expressions in classical mathematical 

4programs are rather simple and thus do not suffer much from expression swell. The AMSs and AD frameworks surveyed in this section otherwise follow the AD paradigm, as does ExaModels.jl, which ships its own AD implementation (Section 5). AD runs in either forward mode or reverse mode , and reverse mode has long been the mode of choice in AMSs for mathematical programming. A forward pass propagates directional derivatives to all outputs simultaneously, so forward mode scales well with the number of outputs. A reverse pass accumulates the sensitivities of one output with respect to all inputs, so reverse mode scales well with the number of inputs (Griewank and Walther, 2008). As observed above, the callbacks of NLPs with partially separable, repetitive algebraic structure consist of many small, independent, scalar-valued expressions, each depending on only a few variables. For such scalar-valued expressions the many-output advantage of forward mode does not apply, and a single adjoint pass per expression yields all of its partial derivatives at a cost proportional to one evaluation. ExaModels.jl uses reverse mode (Section 5). There are two paradigms for implementing AD: operator overloading , which redefines arithmetic on augmented types as the program runs, and source-code transformation , which rewrites the program, or an intermediate representation of it, into one that also computes derivatives. Existing AD systems can mostly be classified into these two categories. PyTorch uses operator overloading, building a representation of the computed function at every execution (Paszke et al., 2019), and ForwardDiff.jl implements forward mode by operator overloading on dual number types (Revels, Lubin, and Papamarkou, 2016). JAX traces Python programs through overloaded tracer objects and differentiates the trace by program transformation (Bradbury et al., 2018). Zygote.jl applies source-code transformation to Julia’s intermediate representation in static single assignment form (Innes, 2018), and Enzyme does the same at the level of the LLVM intermediate representation (Moses and Churavy, 2020). Among AMSs for mathematical programs, CasADi implements AD as source-code transformation on its symbolic graph, generating new derivative expressions from captured ones (Andersson et al., 2019). AMPL parses models into expression graphs differentiated by ASL (Gay, 2018), and GAMS uses a similar built-in pipeline (Bussieck and Meeraus, 2004). JuMP captures nonlinear expressions into runtime expression graphs, which its general-purpose AD routines then differentiate. The capture was originally done by syntactic macros (Dunning, Huchette, and Lubin, 2017), and is done by operator overloading in its current interface (Lubin, Dowson, et al., 2023). Operator overloading is simple to implement and inherits the full flexibility of the host language, since the program runs as ordinary code and the overloaded operators observe each operation as it executes. That observation is also its overhead: the operators fire again at every evaluation, so the tape or graph from which the derivatives are computed is rebuilt at each execution, even when the structure of the computation has not changed. Source-code transformation instead produces derivative code ahead of time, avoiding this overhead at the cost of a substantially more complex implementation (Margossian, 2019). As a consequence, it has traditionally been perceived that operator overloading cannot be as efficient as source-code transformation and carries additional overhead. However, in languages built on multiple dispatch and JIT compilation, such as Julia (Bezanson et al., 2017), this perception no longer holds: operator overloading can be used to compile derivative evaluation code specialized to the problem’s algebraic structure, as encoded in the data types, and the resulting native code runs with no per-evaluation overhead. The two mechanisms work together: multiple dispatch realizes operator overloading by selecting, for each operation, the method defined for the augmented types, and the JIT compiler then specializes each method for the concrete types it is invoked with, generating dedicated derivative evaluation code that is compiled once and reused. The implementation remains simple: it depends largely on the compiler of the language and relies less on direct manipulation of the source code. ExaModels.jl exploits this feature: the algebraic expression tree is aggressively typed, so the Julia compiler sees the full algebraic structure at compilation time and compiles the derivative evaluation code without performance overhead. We demonstrate this through the compiler-generated LLVM intermediate representation reproduced in Section A. 1

> 1Generating such low-level code is inherent to Julia’s compilation, as in any compiled language, and is distinct from the separate source-level code-generation steps that some AMSs require; ExaModels.jl involves none of the latter.

5Table 1: AMSs with built-in AD that target smooth NLPs. “Pattern-aware” indicates whether the system preserves the repetitive structure of indexed constraints for parallel derivative evaluation.                             

> System Language Problem classes AD Pattern-aware AMPL own LP, MILP, NLP ASL (built-in) no GAMS own LP, MILP, NLP built-in no JuMP Julia LP, MILP, conic, NLP reverse-mode on graph no CasADi C++/Py/MATLAB LP, MILP, conic, NLP source transform yes Gravity C++ NLP (network) symbolic yes ExaModels.jl Julia NLP reverse-mode per pattern yes

1.1.3 Modeling Systems with Built-in Automatic Differentiation 

ExaModels.jl targets NLPs of the structured form discussed above and supplies its own AD, so what follows focuses on the AMSs that operate in the same space. These are the systems that target classical mathematical programming problems, including general smooth NLPs, and that ship with their own AD machinery. Five such systems are reviewed below, and Table 1 compares them with ExaModels.jl. AMPL (Fourer, Gay, and Kernighan, 1990) is a standalone language with its own parser, exposing the NLP function callbacks through the ASL via the .nl interchange format; GAMS (Bussieck and Meeraus, 2004) emerged around the same time and is similar in design. JuMP (Dunning, Huchette, and Lubin, 2017; Lubin, Dowson, et al., 2023) is embedded in Julia; through macros and operator overloading it builds a per-scalar expression graph and runs reverse-mode AD on the graph. CasADi (Andersson et al., 2019) is a C++ symbolic framework whose central abstraction is the Function , a compiled expression graph that can be reused, embedded, or emitted as standalone C code; it supports both forward and reverse AD, and uses graph coloring to evaluate sparse Jacobians and Hessians. Gravity (Hijazi, Wang, and Coffrin, 2018) introduces “constraint templates” to preserve the pattern structure of indexed constraints. We compare these systems along two axes: how the partially separable, repetitive structure of indexed constraints is preserved and exploited, and whether the NLP functions are evaluated by compiled or interpreted code. The first axis is structure exploitation, and most systems do not exploit the repetitive structure. AMPL, GAMS, and JuMP build flat, per-scalar expression graphs at model construction, where every constraint instance becomes a node in a single large graph that AD traverses at evaluation time. JuMP is the canonical example of iterator flattening. Indexed-constraint syntax such as @constraint(model, [i=1:N], ...) is lowered to a flat scalar collection before AD, so the iteration visible to the user is no longer visible to the AD machinery. Two strategies preserve indexed-constraint structure at the modeling layer: vectorization and templatizing. Vectorization expresses an indexed family as a single matrix-algebra operation, so the repetition lives in the dimensions of the matrices and vectors rather than in enumerated scalar expressions. Templatizing declares a single algebraic expression parameterized by a data set and evaluates that one expression across all instances, so the repetition lives in the data rather than in the expression. The two strategies differ in abstraction rather than reach. Heterogeneous indexed structure, meaning general repeated expressions whose size or form varies per index, such as variable-size sums, can be expressed in either form. Vectorization shifts the work to pre-constructing sparse incidence matrices, while templatizing expresses the repeated expression directly. The representative implementation of vectorization is CasADi, which compiles each Function once and reuses it across calls. CasADi supports structure preservation through vectorized expressions of its matrix symbolic type, MX. The slice x[1:] - x[:-1] stays a single matrix-level node, and both the symbolic graph and the generated C function body remain constant-size as the discretization grows; only the loop bound and workspace offsets change. This requires the model to be written as matrix algebra. Heterogeneous indexed structure, such as ACOPF power balance over each bus’s generators and incident lines, can be encoded via sparse incidence matrices and sparse matrix–vector products. The result is mathematically equivalent to a templatized model, but uses a different abstraction: matrix algebra over pre-constructed sparsity patterns 

6versus per-index expressions over data sets. Machine learning frameworks such as JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) and PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) are not widely used for formulating and solving classical mathematical programs, but they support the same matrix algebra syntax and admit natural vectorization. The model is written in whole-array operations and differentiated by the framework’s AD. They are nonetheless natural companions for GPU evaluation of the NLP functions: gradient evaluation is directly supported, and the sparse Jacobian and Hessian can be evaluated through coloring-based sparse AD. Templatizing as an evaluation strategy is a more recent idea, first explored in Gravity through its constraint templates: a constraint is declared once over an index set, and the repeated structure is exploited to reduce the evaluation time of the NLP functions, including the Jacobian and the Hessian. Gravity is implemented as a C++ library in which the numerical accuracy of variables and parameters is specifiable by the user. It further offers convexity detection, multithreading of subproblems, and lazy constraint generation, and the authors report function evaluation five times faster and memory use up to 60 times lower than JuMP (Hijazi, Wang, and Coffrin, 2018). The indexed declaration syntax itself is common: JuMP’s @constraint(model, [i=1:N], ...) and Pyomo’s Constraint(index set, rule=f) both declare an indexed constraint family in a single statement. To the best of our knowledge, however, neither system specializes the evaluation internally to exploit the structure this syntax exposes, and the declaration is unrolled into flat per-scalar instances. Because this indexed style has long been standard in the AMSs of mathematical programming and operations research, such as AMPL, GAMS, JuMP, and Pyomo, the modeling syntax of ExaModels.jl remains close to that of existing modeling tools. ExaModels.jl follows the templatizing strategy but goes beyond what Gravity has proposed. It provides a general abstraction that can represent diverse repetitive patterns, together with an implementation built on it, namely type-stable parameterized expression trees compiled per pattern by the Julia compiler (Section 4). This design naturally leads to GPU parallelization, which we implement through KernelAbstractions.jl and demonstrate in this paper (Section 6). As of this writing, neither CasADi nor Gravity supports GPU-native derivative evaluation. The second axis is the evaluation path, compiled versus interpreted, where compilation reduces per-callback runtime overhead at the cost of longer build time. AMPL parses models to the .nl format, which is evaluated by ASL with compiled operator implementations; a legacy nlc tool can emit standalone C. GAMS uses a similar built-in pipeline. CasADi provides both options: by default a Function is evaluated through CasADi’s runtime, which walks a flat operation sequence with compiled operator implementations; alternatively, standalone C code can be emitted via codegen. Gravity uses symbolic differentiation and dispatches compiled C++ templates. JuMP is embedded in the JIT-compiled Julia language, but its default AD does not compile a specialized derivative kernel per constraint type. It is a general-purpose interpreter that walks the expression graph at each callback, so it cannot be regarded as a compiled AD approach. The exception is its SymbolicAD backend (Dowson and Schanen, 2022), which reduces each constraint to a canonical symbolic form and computes a single symbolic derivative per distinct constraint structure. The resulting compiled evaluator is then reused across all instances that share that structure. ExaModels.jl is firmly in the compiled category, and it compiles aggressively. It builds a parameterized expression tree at model-construction time and applies reverse-mode AD directly to that tree (Section 5). Because the tree is type-stable end-to-end, each callback compiles into a single chunk of LLVM code specialized to the problem’s algebraic structure (Section 7.2.1). This gives the Julia compiler full opportunity to optimize the NLP functions, and it also makes the callbacks straightforward to convert into GPU kernels (Section 6). 

## 1.2 Contributions 

The contributions of this paper are methodological (M), implementational (I), and experimental (E). 

M1. We introduce a SIMD abstraction for NLPs that represents a problem as a small number of algebraic patterns, each evaluated over many data points. The abstraction preserves the pattern–data separation throughout model construction and reduces NLP function evaluation to embarrassingly parallel loops over data points, which is the structure that GPU execution requires. The closest prior idea is Gravity’s constraint templates (Hijazi, Wang, and Coffrin, 2018); our abstraction goes beyond theirs by providing 

7a general representation that covers diverse repetitive patterns and extends naturally to parallel GPU evaluation. 

M2. We develop a coloring-free sparse AD algorithm that exploits regular per-pattern sparsity to compute Jacobians and Hessians in a partially compressed COO form. Unlike the coloring-based sparse AD of standard practice (Gebremedhin, Manne, and Pothen, 2005), the sparsity analysis is applied at the level of the parameterized expression tree, and the derivative values are partially compressed over each tree. This minimizes the fill-in while eliminating the race conditions that arise when the values are accumulated in parallel, so that element-wise, coloring-free sparse AD can be implemented for GPUs. To the best of our knowledge, this approach is new. 

I1. We present, to our knowledge, the first AMS with cross-platform GPU-native derivative evaluation, portable across NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, and Apple devices via KernelAbstractions.jl (Churavy, 2025); the same model code runs on all backends without modification. 

I2. We support AOT compilation to standalone binaries independent of the Julia runtime, with no code generation step. Whereas systems such as CasADi and CVXPY provide separate code-generation tools for deployment, in ExaModels.jl exactly the same code serves both JIT and AOT compilation; to our knowledge, it is the first AMS with this property. 

I3. We support arbitrary numeric precision by exploiting the type flexibility of the Julia language. Without modification, the same model code runs in Float64 ; in Float32 , including on hardware that supports only single precision; and in user-defined types realizing software-emulated extended precision, such as the double-double arithmetic of DoubleFloats.jl (Sarnoff and JuliaMath, 2022). Existing AMSs are typically fixed to double precision. Among those reviewed above, Gravity allows variables and parameters to be declared over a fixed set of built-in C++ numeric types (float, double, long double, integer, and complex), though not over user-defined types, and JuMP’s nonlinear interface is restricted to Float64 .

E1. We contribute ExaModels-native implementations of the Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek (Lukˇ san and Vlˇ cek, 1999), COPS (Dolan and Mor´ e, 2001), and PGLIB-OPF benchmark libraries. We systematically measure derivative evaluation performance on the CPU and across multiple GPU backends. These benchmark implementations are a contribution in their own right: they run natively on the GPU and can be reused in later studies for the performance benchmarking of GPU-resident NLP algorithms. We report GPU speedups of up to 76 × over single-threaded CPU evaluation. 

Relationship to prior work. The concept of the SIMD abstraction first appeared in Shin, Anitescu, and Pacaud (2024) as part of an ACOPF-specific GPU optimization framework. The abstraction itself, the parameterized expression tree, the coloring-free sparse AD algorithm, and the multi-backend GPU implementation have not previously been elaborated, and this is the role of the present paper. Several subsequent works use ExaModels.jl as the modeling layer: Johnson et al. (2025) provides a power-systems library on top of it; the GPU-native condensed-space interior-point methods of Pacaud, Shin, et al. (2024) consume its callbacks; and Pacaud and Shin (2024) reports a fully GPU-resident optimization pipeline pairing ExaModels.jl with MadNLP.jl (Shin, Pacaud, and Montoison, 2025). 

## 1.3 Limitations 

The proposed approach also carries drawbacks that follow directly from its design choices. 

• The approach is runtime-optimized at the cost of a compilation overhead: the NLP function callbacks are compiled specifically for each algebraic pattern, so every new expression structure must be compiled at least once before it can be evaluated. This places a burden on the compiler and adds a one-time compilation latency ahead of the first evaluation. The design favors runtime performance over the ability to quickly try out many formulations, which may not be ideal for rapid prototyping across structurally different models. It is best suited, for example, to a mature model deployed for fast repeated evaluation, as in real-time decision making. 

8• The user is required to write the model in the SIMD-compatible form. It is easier in many cases to state a model through explicit loops over scalar constraints. The pattern–data separation also requires, in some cases, the data arrays to be created before the objective and constraint patterns can be declared, which may require restructuring compared with the natural formulation in other modeling systems. 

• The benefits are contingent on the problem being partially separable and repetitive, and a model with many distinct patterns and few data points per pattern gains little. Components that cannot be expressed as parameterized expression trees, such as constraints with data-dependent branching or embedded simulation codes, fall outside the abstraction. These are instead accommodated through external oracles (Section 7.5), which do not carry the performance guarantees of the abstraction. 

• The templatized syntax expresses the NLP functions entirely through scalar operations. Unless the external oracle mechanism is used, the evaluation invokes no vectorized library routines, such as BLAS kernels or sparse matrix–vector products, and therefore cannot benefit from such optimized libraries. 

## 1.4 Outline 

The remainder of this paper falls into three parts, with the fundamentals developed in a top-down manner. Section 2 presents the modeling abstraction and the user- and solver-facing interfaces. Section 3 presents the data structures behind them: the model containers and the internal types that represent variables, parameters, objectives, and constraints, whose common building block is the SIMDFunction . Section 4 presents the parameterized expression tree, the core idea within the SIMDFunction , and describes how individual nodes and leaves are put together to form the tree. Section 5 explains how this tree is traversed to evaluate the derivatives with the coloring-free sparse AD algorithm. These fundamentals are then realized in a high-performance, portable implementation. Section 6 describes the GPU acceleration via KernelAbstractions.jl, and Section 7 collects implementation-level details deferred from the main development, including the extension of the abstraction to two-stage stochastic and batch problems. Finally, the experiments are reported in Section 8, and Section 9 concludes the paper. 

## 1.5 Notation 

We use Rn for n-dimensional real space. Code identifiers are typeset in monospace . We further distinguish a mathematical quantity from its software representation: for example, x denotes a vector as a mathematical object, whereas x refers to the array that stores it. We also use a few standard Julia conventions throughout. Indexing is one-based, following Julia’s convention. Variable blocks may nonetheless be declared over arbitrary integer index ranges, such as the 0:nh blocks of the Goddard rocket model in Section 2. The symbol <: 

denotes the subtype relation, so Node1 <: AbstractNode reads “ Node1 is a subtype of AbstractNode .” A trailing ! marks a function that mutates its arguments in place (e.g., set value! ). A leading @ marks a macro, one of Julia’s metaprogramming facilities. Rather than being called at run time, a macro receives its arguments as unevaluated syntax and rewrites them, at parse time, into an equivalent block of ordinary code that is then compiled in its place. Writing @add var , for instance, is shorthand for the expanded sequence of statements the macro emits. A name written with curly braces, Type {I, J, ... }, is a parametric type :the entries I, J, . . . are its type parameters, on which the compiler specializes the generated code (e.g., 

DataIndexed {I, J }). An anonymous function is written (args) -> body (e.g., (i, x) -> x[i+1]^2 ). 

# 2 Modeling Abstraction and Interfaces 

ExaModels.jl sits between the user and the solver (Figure 1). The user states a problem in mathematical terms, while the solver asks for numerical values of the NLP functions at each iteration. An AMS must therefore expose an interface on both sides: a solver-facing callback interface for evaluating the model and a user-facing syntax for building it. On the solver side, the interface is largely standard. ExaModels.jl follows the convention of NLPMod-els.jl (Orban, Soares Siqueira, and contributors, 2023), which fixes the model–solver interface as a set of meta-information accessors and callback functions for objective, constraint, gradient, Jacobian, and Hessian 

9User       

> @add var ,@add par ,
> @add obj ,@add expr ,
> @add con ,@add con! ,
> set parameter! ,
> solution ,multipliers
> ExaModels.jl
> stores the model in the SIMD form (3); exposes meta-information and callbacks for the NLP (2)
> Solver
> obj ,grad! ,cons! ,
> jac coord! ,
> hess coord!
> algebraic model structured solution meta-information and callbacks flat solution

Figure 1: ExaModels.jl between the user and the solver. Solid arrows carry the model forward from the modeling syntax to the solver callbacks; dashed arrows carry the solution back. evaluation. An ExaModels.jl model can therefore be passed directly to solvers for general NLPs, such as Ipopt (W¨ achter and Biegler, 2006), Uno (Vanaret and Leyffer, 2026), and MadNLP.jl (Shin, Pacaud, and Montoison, 2025), and to any other solver in the JuliaSmoothOptimizers (JSO) ecosystem. The user side is what distinguishes ExaModels.jl. Each objective term and constraint is declared as an algebraic pattern paired with a data iterator, so a whole model is stated in a few such declarations. The declarations also keep the pattern–data separation intact for the evaluation machinery. Section 2.1 presents the solver-facing interface: the canonical NLP form and the meta-information accessors and callback functions that ExaModels.jl must supply. Section 2.2 presents the user-facing side: the SIMD abstraction, which preserves the partially separable, repetitive structure of large-scale NLPs, and the modeling syntax that builds models in that form. 

## 2.1 Solver-Facing Interface 

2.1.1 NLP Formulation 

The solver-side mathematical abstraction of the NLP for ExaModels.jl is as follows: min  

> x∈Rn

f (x; θ) s.t. g♭ ≤ g(x; θ) ≤ g♯, x♭ ≤ x ≤ x♯, (2) where x ∈ Rn is the decision vector, f (·) : Rn → R is the objective function, g(·) : Rn → Rm is the constraint function, and x♭, x ♯ ∈ Rn and g♭, g ♯ ∈ Rm are the variable and constraint bounds. The vector θ ∈ Rp collects 

problem parameters : quantities that the objective and constraints depend on but that are held fixed during the solve rather than optimized over. ExaModels.jl treats every model as such a parametric NLP by default; a model with no parameters is simply the special case p = 0. Throughout the paper, we assume that f (·)and g(·) are twice differentiable and well defined over the entire set defined by the bounds. The form (2) is canonical: any NLP can be written this way, and it is the form in which solvers expect the problem. As discussed in Section 1, an NLP solver does not consume a fixed set of problem data. Instead, it queries the modeling layer for numerical evaluations (Nocedal and Wright, 2006) at every iterate x it visits during the solve. The implementational abstraction splits the information the solver needs from ExaModels.jl into two kinds: static meta-information about the problem, supplied once, and per-iteration NLP function callbacks ,evaluated on demand. 

2.1.2 Meta-Information 

Before the solve begins, the solver queries static information about the problem, that is, data that is fixed throughout the solve and therefore supplied only once. ExaModels.jl stores this data in an 

NLPModels.NLPModelMeta object and exposes it through the NLPModels.jl meta-information accessors, such as NLPModels.get nvar and NLPModels.get ncon . The main entries are: 

• nvar , ncon , nnzj , nnzh : integer values for the problem dimensions, namely the numbers of variables and constraints and the numbers of Jacobian and Lagrangian Hessian nonzeros; 

10 • lvar /uvar , lcon /ucon , x0 , y0 : vector values that pin down the instance and its starting point, namely the variable bounds x♭, x ♯, the constraint bounds g♭, g ♯, and the initial primal point and Lagrange multipliers, both zero by default; 

• ifix , ilow , iupp , irng , ifree and jfix , jlow , jupp , jrng , jfree : index vectors partitioning the variables and constraints by bound type (fixed, lower-bounded, upper-bounded, range-bounded, and free); and 

• minimize : the optimization sense, that is, whether the problem is a minimization or a maximization. 

2.1.3 Callback Functions 

At each iterate, the solver queries the numerical values of the NLP functions through five callbacks. It supplies the iterate x and, for the Lagrangian Hessian, an objective weight and the multipliers. These callbacks constitute the solver-facing interface of ExaModels.jl. Except for the objective value, which is returned as a scalar, the callbacks are in-place (hence the ! suffix) and write their results into preallocated output arrays: 

• NLPModels.obj(model, x) : the objective value f (x) ∈ R;

• NLPModels.grad!(model, x, g) : the objective gradient ∇f (x) ∈ Rn, written into g;

• NLPModels.cons!(model, x, c) : the constraint values g(x) ∈ Rm, written into c;

• NLPModels.jac coord!(model, x, v) : the sparse constraint Jacobian ∇g(x) ∈ Rm×n, with nonzero values written into v;

• NLPModels.hess coord!(model, x, y, v; obj weight) : the sparse n × n Lagrangian Hessian 

σ∇2f (x) + Pmj=1 λj ∇2gj (x), with nonzero values written into v,where λ ∈ Rm is the vector of Lagrange multipliers, supplied in y, and σ is the objective weight, supplied as the keyword argument obj weight . Here and throughout the paper, gradients are column vectors, and the Jacobian of a vector-valued function stacks the transposed gradients of its components as rows. These five are the most commonly used callbacks; the NLPModels.jl interface additionally specifies others, such as: 

• NLPModels.jac structure!(model, I, J) : the COO row and column indices of the nonzero Jacobian entries, written into I and J;

• NLPModels.hess structure!(model, I, J) : the COO row and column indices of the nonzero Hessian entries, written into I and J;

• NLPModels.jprod! : the Jacobian–vector product; 

• NLPModels.jtprod! : the vector–Jacobian product; 

• NLPModels.hprod! : the Hessian–vector product. The index vectors are queried once, at the start of the solve. Together with the value vector v, they form the COO representation of the sparse derivative matrices, and only v is recomputed at each iterate. For the solver, the objective and constraint values are used to monitor progress (e.g., in the line search), and the first- and second-order derivatives are used to compute the step direction (e.g., the Newton step). Because they are evaluated at every iterate, these callbacks are performance-critical; providing them efficiently is a central goal of ExaModels.jl. This callback API was developed in NLPModels.jl by the JSO organization around the abstract type 

NLPModels.AbstractNLPModel . It decouples the modeling layer from the solver layer: any model that implements the interface is accepted by any compatible solver, including those listed at the opening of this section. ExaModel is a subtype of NLPModels.AbstractNLPModel and implements this callback interface. 

11 2.2 User-Facing Abstraction and Interface 

To provide the callbacks of Section 2.1, ExaModels.jl must store the information needed to evaluate the NLP functions. It stores that information in the form of the SIMD NLP formulation, keeping each repetitive pattern together with its data. 

2.2.1 SIMD NLP Formulation 

The SIMD NLP formulation captures the partially separable, repetitive structure of large-scale NLPs (Section 1) at the modeling level. Problems like the Goddard rocket (1) belong to the following class of NLPs, in which the repetitive patterns are kept explicit: min 

> x♭≤x≤x♯
> L

X

> ℓ=1
> Iℓ

X

> i=1

f (ℓ)(x; θ, p (ℓ) 

> i

) (3a) s.t. g♭ ≤

h

g(m)(x; θ, q (m) 

> j

)

iJm

> j=1

+

> Nm

X

> n=1
> Kn

X

> k=1

h(n)(x; θ, s (n) 

> k

) ≤ g♯, ∀ m ∈ { 1, . . . , M }, (3b) where x ∈ Rn is the vector of decision variables with bounds x♭, x ♯, and θ ∈ Rp is the problem-parameter vector of (2). The algebraic patterns f (ℓ) : Rn → R and g(m) : Rn → R are twice differentiable scalar functions of x, where these signatures suppress the dependence on θ and on the per-instance data. Each augmentation pattern h(n) : Rn → RJm is a vector-valued function whose output has a single nonzero entry. The position of that entry within constraint block m is fixed by the data s(n) 

> k

. The quantities p(ℓ) 

> i

, q(m) 

> j

, and s(n) 

> k

are problem data that parameterize each pattern instance. The vector θ, in contrast, is shared: the same parameter vector enters every pattern and every data point. The objective (3a) is split into L groups of objective patterns, where pattern f (ℓ) is evaluated over Iℓ data points. The constraints (3b) consist of M blocks: within block 

m, the “base” pattern g(m) defines Jm constraints, and the “augmentation” patterns h(n) contribute additive terms to these constraints. The augmentation structure arises naturally in network models, for example when arc flows are summed into nodal balance equations, and is discussed further in Section 3.1. Unlike (2), (3) is not a canonical form, since not every NLP is naturally written this way. It is, however, a form that appears throughout practice, as the examples below illustrate. Problems with partially separable, repetitive algebraic structure fit the form (3) with only a few distinct patterns; the Goddard rocket (1) is a direct instance, with the five patterns identified in Section 1, and the same holds across the problem categories surveyed there. We call the comprehensive interface built on this formulation the SIMD abstraction . It comprises the user-facing modeling syntax and the solver-facing evaluation machinery: the user writes the model in the form of (3), and the model data is stored in a structured form that exposes the repeated structure. This 

pattern–data separation is the foundation of the abstraction. Because the structure is partially separable, each pattern evaluation is independent across data indices, and the derivative computations inherit the same embarrassingly parallel structure. For a given pattern f (ℓ),the gradient contributions ∇xf (ℓ)(x; θ, p (ℓ) 

> i

) for i = 1 , . . . , I ℓ can be evaluated in parallel, and so can the Jacobian and Hessian contributions. By preserving the pattern structure at the modeling level, ExaModels.jl makes this parallelism directly available to the AD implementation. When the number of patterns is fixed and the problem size grows only through the number of data points, the evaluation of the NLP functions in principle attains O(1) parallel time complexity, given sufficiently many threads. The total work still grows with the number of data points; it is the parallel evaluation depth that stays constant. How the derivative computations are carried out in this parallel form, including the accumulation of overlapping contributions without race conditions, is presented in Section 5. The structure of (3) suggests how to store a model without losing its parameterized form. Rather than recording every scalar term one by one, each pattern is kept as a bundle of an instruction , the algebraic expression to evaluate, and the data over which that instruction is repeated. Because a large-scale NLP typically comprises only a few distinct patterns, the entire model reduces to a small number of such bundles. 

12 ExaModels.jl realizes the instruction as a SIMDFunction , which an Objective or a Constraint pairs with the matching data iterator. The model is therefore stored as a collection of SIMDFunction s, one per pattern, together with their data. Each callback then reduces to a loop over patterns that evaluates each pattern’s 

SIMDFunction at all of its data points. For the objective (3a), the value f (x) is the sum of the per-data-point evaluations, and the constraint and derivative callbacks follow the same structure. The internal construction of a SIMDFunction is presented in Sections 4 to 6. 

2.2.2 Modeling Syntax 

The syntax with which the user builds a model is shown on the Goddard rocket (1) of Section 1, in four stages: creating a model, solving it, accessing the solution, and updating the data and resolving. 

Creating a model. The variables, objective, and constraints are declared on an ExaCore : 

> 1

using ExaModels, NLPModelsIpopt  

> 23

# problem data  

> 4

nh = 200 # number of time steps  

> 5

h_0, v_0, m_0, g_0 = 1.0, 0.0, 1.0, 1.0  

> 6

T_c, h_c, v_c, m_c = 3.5, 500.0, 620.0, 0.6  

> 7

c_e = 0.5 * sqrt(g_0 * h_0)  

> 8

m_f = m_c * m_0  

> 9

D_c = 0.5 * v_c * (m_0 / g_0)  

> 10

T_max = T_c * m_0 * g_0  

> 11 12

# maximize final altitude  

> 13

core = ExaCore(minimize = false)  

> 14 15

# decision variables  

> 16

@add_var(core, h, 0:nh; start = 1.0, lvar = 1.0)  

> 17

@add_var(core, v, 0:nh; start = (i/nh * (1 - i/nh) for i = 0:nh))  

> 18

@add_var(core, m, 0:nh;  

> 19

start = ((m_f - m_0) * i/nh + m_0 for i = 0:nh),  

> 20

lvar = m_f, uvar = m_0)  

> 21

@add_var(core, tau, 0:nh; start = T_max/2, lvar = 0.0, uvar = T_max)  

> 22

@add_var(core, dt, 1; start = 1/nh, lvar = 0.0)  

> 23 24

# objective: final altitude  

> 25

@add_obj(core, h[nh])  

> 26 27

# altitude dynamics  

> 28

@add_con(core, alt,  

> 29

-h[i] + h[i-1] + 0.5 * dt[1] * (v[i] + v[i-1]) for i = 1:nh)  

> 30 31

# velocity dynamics  

> 32

@add_con(core, vel,  

> 33

-v[i] + v[i-1] + 0.5 * dt[1] * (  

> 34

(tau[i] - D_c * v[i]^2 * exp(-h_c * (h[i] - h_0) / h_0)  

> 35

- m[i] * g_0 * (h_0 / h[i])^2) / m[i]  

> 36

+ (tau[i-1] - D_c * v[i-1]^2 * exp(-h_c * (h[i-1] - h_0) / h_0)  

> 37

- m[i-1] * g_0 * (h_0 / h[i-1])^2) / m[i-1])  

> 38

for i = 1:nh)  

> 39 40

# mass dynamics 

13 41 @add_con(core, mass,  

> 42

-m[i] + m[i-1] + 0.5 * dt[1] * (-tau[i]/c_e - tau[i-1]/c_e) for i = 1:nh)  

> 43 44

# parameter: required final mass  

> 45

@add_par(core, mf, [m_f])  

> 46 47

# boundary conditions  

> 48

@add_con(core, h[0] - h_0) # initial altitude  

> 49

@add_con(core, v[0] - v_0) # initial velocity  

> 50

@add_con(core, m[0] - m_0) # initial mass  

> 51

@add_con(core, m[nh] - mf[1]) # final mass  

> 52 53

# instantiate: ExaCore -> ExaModel  

> 54

model = ExaModel(core) 

The patterns, namely the dynamics alt , vel , and mass , the boundary conditions, and the objective, correspond directly to (1). Each @add var call creates a block of variables rather than a single variable: h, for example, comprises one variable for each index in 0:nh . The same holds for the constraints: each @add con call creates a block of constraints, one per element of its data iterator (a singleton block when no iterator is given, as for the boundary conditions). By default, @add con declares an equality constraint, since lcon and ucon 

are both zero. An inequality constraint is declared by setting the keyword argument lcon or ucon . The final line instantiates the ExaCore as an ExaModel , the form in which the model is passed to the solver. The 

SIMDFunction s and their sparsity structure were already built as the patterns were added. The example contains no for loop outside the ExaModels.jl syntax. The objective and constraints are always declared as Julia generator expressions, body for i = iterator , with the loop written inside the macro call. We follow the Julia convention and call this construct the generator ; its iterator component is the 

data iterator . Because the data iterator is passed to the modeling backend rather than unrolled by the user, each declaration maps directly onto one pattern of (3), and the model is stored in the form of the SIMD abstraction. 

Solving. The model is passed to any NLPModels.jl-compatible solver:  

> 1

result = ipopt(model) # solve via Ipopt (NLPModelsIpopt.jl)  

> 2

result = madnlp(model) # solve via MadNLP.jl  

> 3

result = uno(model) # solve via Uno (UnoSolver.jl) 

Solving the problem on a GPU requires a GPU-compatible model. Such a model is obtained by replacing the first line of the example with core = ExaCore(minimize = false, backend = CUDABackend()) , with no other changes (Section 6). Passing that model to a GPU-compatible solver such as MadNLP.jl then solves the problem entirely on the GPU. Solvers in the JSO ecosystem return their results in a common template defined by SolverCore.jl. Here result is an instance of a subtype of SolverCore.AbstractExecutionStats . Its fields carry the solver status and the run statistics, together with the full primal solution ( result.solution ), the constraint multipliers ( result.multipliers ), and the bound multipliers ( result.multipliers L and 

result.multipliers U ). Each of these is a flat vector over all variables or over all constraints. The accessors below read from this object in the same way regardless of which solver produced it. 

Accessing the solution. From these flat vectors, the ExaModels.jl accessors slice out the part that belongs to a given block, using the block’s offset, and return it in the block’s shape:  

> 1

# primal: altitude trajectory  

> 2

h_sol = solution(result, h)  

> 34

# dual: velocity-dynamics multipliers 

14 5 lam = multipliers(result, vel) 

The variable-bound multipliers are read back the same way, via multipliers L(result, h) and 

multipliers U(result, h) .

Updating and resolving. Suppose that, after the solve, we wish to re-solve the problem with an updated value of the required final mass, held in the parameter mf . Such a change leaves the problem structure intact, so the numerical data can be modified in place and the model re-solved without rebuilding it. Here we raise the required final mass, tighten the thrust upper bound, and warm-start from the previous solution. Warm starting initializes the solver at a previously computed solution, primal or dual or both, so that a re-solve after a small change in the data converges in fewer iterations. The compiled SIMDFunction sare reused unchanged, and only the parameter, bound, and initial-point arrays are overwritten:  

> 1

# tighten max thrust  

> 2

set_uvar!(model, tau, fill(0.8 * T_max, nh + 1))  

> 34

# raise the required final mass  

> 5

set_value!(model, mf, [1.05 * m_f])  

> 67

# warm-start from previous solve  

> 8

set_start!(model, tau, solution(result, tau))  

> 9

result = ipopt(model) # resolve, no rebuild 

Because an ExaModel is a standard AbstractNLPModel , such warm-started resolves also work with any repeated-solve interface the chosen solver exposes. Some solvers reuse their internals across calls through more specialized interfaces, such as a persistent solver object with pre-allocated workspaces; for optimizing re-solve performance, we refer the reader to the documentation of the chosen solver. The example here demonstrates that the model object itself can be reused, which is most effective when successive solves leave the problem dimensions and the sparsity pattern unchanged. 

2.2.3 Model-Building Macros 

An ExaCore is a caching object: it accumulates the variables, parameters, objective patterns, and constraint patterns as the model is built. For the full reference to the macros that build an ExaCore , including every signature, keyword argument, and usage example, we refer the reader to the online documentation (Shin and contributors, 2025). Each macro takes the core as its first argument and rebinds it. For example, 

@add var(core, x, n) creates a variable block, binds the handle x to it, and reassigns core to the updated core; the other macros follow the same convention. The rebinding is needed because an ExaCore is immutable: each call produces a new core (Section 3.1). The macros are: 

• @add var(core, x, dims; start, lvar, uvar) : adds a variable block x with the given dimensions and optional initial values and bounds. 

• @add par(core, p, data) : adds a parameter block p whose values are appended to the parameter vector θ.

• @add obj(core, expr for i in data) : adds an objective pattern. The generator body is the ex-pression tree, and the generator’s iterator supplies the data. 

• @add con(core, expr for i in data; lcon, ucon) : adds a constraint pattern that defines a new block with one constraint per element of the data iterator, with bounds lcon and ucon .

• @add con!(core, con[j] += expr for (j, ...) in data) : augments an existing constraint block 

con with additive terms. This corresponds to the h(n) terms in (3b) and keeps the number of expression trees small. In network models, for instance, each contribution type such as generator injection or line flow becomes its own pattern, rather than being inlined into one large expression per constraint. 

15 • @add expr(core, s, expr for i in data) : adds a named, reusable subexpression block s that can be referenced as s[i] in later objectives and constraints. This lets the user name an intermediate quantity that recurs across several objectives or constraints, such as a nodal power injection that feeds both an objective term and several balance constraints. A reference s[i] inlines the subexpression’s tree into the consuming expression and introduces no auxiliary variables or constraints. Because the subexpression is itself a parameterized expression tree (Section 4), this keeps the model description compact. The reuse is a modeling convenience rather than a shared runtime computation, since each consuming pattern inlines its own copy of the tree (Section 7.1.1). 

2.2.4 Model Data Accessors 

Once the model is built, its numerical data can be read and modified one block at a time. In the accessors below, x, con , and param are the handles bound by the user’s variable, constraint, and parameter declarations (Section 2.2.2): 

• set start!(model, x, values) and get start(model, x) : the initial primal values of variable block 

x.

• set lvar!(model, x, values) /set uvar!(model, x, values) and get lvar(model, x) /

get uvar(model, x) : the variable bounds. 

• set lcon!(model, con, values) /set ucon!(model, con, values) and get lcon(model, con) /

get ucon(model, con) : the constraint bounds. 

• set value!(model, param, values) and get value(model, param) : the parameter values. Each accessor acts on a single variable, constraint, or parameter block, using the offset and dimension recorded in the block’s handle to address the relevant slice without copying. 

2.2.5 Solution Accessors 

The solution reported by the solver is a flat bundle: one vector each for the primal solution x, the constraint multipliers λ, and the bound multipliers, together with the solution status, the objective and constraint values, and solver statistics. The user, however, usually wants the portion that belongs to one declared variable or constraint block. ExaModels.jl therefore provides accessors that slice the flat vectors and return the entries of a single block, addressed by the declaration handles x and con and read from the solver’s result object introduced in the example above: 

• solution(result, x) : the primal solution of variable block x;

• multipliers(result, con) : the multipliers of constraint block con ;

• multipliers L(result, x) /multipliers U(result, x) : the lower- and upper-bound multipliers of variable block x.The per-block structure of the SIMD abstraction thus carries all the way through to how the user supplies data and reads back the solution. 

# 3 Core Data Structures 

The two central data structures in ExaModels.jl both store a model expressed in the SIMD abstraction (3) of Section 2.2 in a standardized form. An ExaCore is the immutable structure that holds the model as it is being built. An ExaModel is the immutable completed model, instantiated from a finished ExaCore , and it implements the NLPModels.jl callback interface of Section 2.1 (Figure 2). Inside these two containers sit the data types that represent the individual patterns of (3). Each objective pattern is stored as an Objective , each constraint block as a Constraint , and each additive contribution to an 

16 var , par : variable/parameter handles obj , cons : pattern tuples     

> x0 ,theta , bounds, and running structural counts backend ,tag ,refs

ExaCore       

> vars ,pars ,objs ,cons : tuples carried from the core
> theta : parameter values meta :NLPModelMeta counters : callback tallies ext : backend workspace

ExaModel ExaModel(core)          

> Solver
> obj ,grad! ,
> cons! ,
> jac coord! ,
> hess coord!
> callbacks
> Objective /Constraint /
> ConstraintAugmentation SIMDFunction : offsets
> o0,o1,o2,o1step,o2step ;
> comp1,comp2 AbstractNode ex-pression tree (see Figure 3) wraps holds tuple entries Each tuple entry realizes one algebraic pattern of the SIMD form (3): Objective ,
> Constraint , and ConstraintAugmentation for the objective, constraint, and augmen-tation patterns.

Figure 2: The construction-time and solver-facing containers. Arrows show what ExaModel(core) carries from one to the other, and which wrapper types sit inside both. existing constraint block as a ConstraintAugmentation . Each of the three wrappers holds a SIMDFunction 

and the data iterator over which the pattern is evaluated. The SIMDFunction in turn holds the parameterized expression tree for one algebraic pattern, together with the offsets and compressor maps that place its output. The expression tree itself, and how it is built, is the subject of Section 4. Both ExaCore and ExaModel are parametric structs . Their type parameters encode the floating-point type T,the array type VT , the backend B, and the concrete types of all stored variables, parameters, objectives, and constraints. For example, ExaCore {Float64, Vector {Float64 }, Nothing, ... } is a CPU model in double precision, and ExaCore {Float32, CuArray {Float32 }, CUDABackend, ... } is a single-precision model on an NVIDIA GPU. Because these choices are captured as type parameters, Julia’s compiler specializes the AD passes and solver callbacks for each concrete combination. A single codebase therefore handles CPU, CUDA, ROCm, oneAPI, and Metal backends with no runtime dispatch and no conditional branching in the evaluation path. The two structs follow a general principle: ExaModels.jl uses explicit, concrete typing throughout its performance-critical evaluation path. Every data structure on this path, from the individual expression-tree nodes up to the ExaCore and ExaModel that contain them, has a fully concrete Julia type. There are no abstractly typed fields, no type-unstable containers, and no runtime polymorphism during callback evaluation. Concrete types let the compiler specialize and inline the evaluation code completely, and they are also what make AOT compilation and GPU kernel generation possible (Section 7.3.1). The price is that even models of moderate complexity carry deeply nested type signatures. The typing of the expression trees is treated in Section 4.2.3. 

## 3.1 ExaCore: Model-Construction Cache 

An ExaCore is the construction-time cache of an optimization model. It accumulates the variables, parameters, algebraic patterns, numerical arrays, and structural counts needed to instantiate the eventual ExaModel . It is created by a call to ExaCore() , which optionally takes a GPU backend. The user then adds variables, parameters, objectives, and constraints with the macros @add var , @add par , @add obj , and @add con . The cache is immutable, so each addition returns an updated ExaCore . The reconstruction mechanics, and their role in preserving concrete types, are detailed in Section 7.1.1. Reflecting the explicit-typing principle, the struct is ExaCore {T, VT, B, S, V, P, O, C, ... }. Its key 

17 type parameters and fields are: 

• T and VT : the floating-point type and the array type, respectively, with VT constrained to 

AbstractVector {T}.

• backend::B : the KernelAbstractions.jl backend (e.g., CUDABackend() ) or nothing for CPU execution. 

• S: the model tag type, a typed extension point for carrying structural metadata without adding fields to the base core. For example, a two-stage core uses it to record scenario information and variable/constraint scenario assignments. 

• var::V : a tuple of Variable handles, each recording the block’s dimensions, its offset into the global variable vector x, its name, and a tag. 

• par::P : a tuple of Parameter handles, whose values are concatenated into the global parameter vector 

θ.

• obj::O : a tuple of Objective structs, each bundling a SIMDFunction and the collected data iterator. 

• cons::C : a tuple of Constraint and ConstraintAugmentation structs. A Constraint defines a new block of constraints with bounds. A ConstraintAugmentation , created via @add con! , adds terms to an existing constraint block without introducing new rows. 

• Primal, dual, parameter, and bound arrays, all of type VT : x0 , θ, lvar , uvar , y0 , lcon , and ucon .

• Running dimension counters (all Int ): nvar and npar count scalar variables and parameters; ncon 

counts constraint rows; nobj counts objective-term instances; and nconaug counts augmentation-term instances. 

• Running sparse-output counts (all Int ): nnzg counts objective-gradient contributions, nnzj counts constraint-Jacobian contributions, and nnzh counts Lagrangian-Hessian contributions. These counts determine output and workspace sizes and are updated as patterns are added. Each @add obj or @add con call builds its SIMDFunction at once, probing sparsity and building the compressor maps at the moment the pattern is registered. The updated ExaCore therefore already carries all the information needed for the final model. 

## 3.2 ExaModel: The Solver-Facing Model 

Once all variables, objectives, and constraints have been added, the user calls ExaModel(core) to instantiate the ExaCore as an immutable ExaModel . The ExaModel carries forward the core’s var , par , obj , and cons 

tuples as the fields vars , pars , objs , and cons , preserving their concrete types while placing them in a form ready for a solver. The instantiation performs four steps. 1. Constructs the NLPModelMeta object. It stores the problem dimensions n and m, the initial primal and dual iterates x0 and y0, the variable and constraint bounds x♭, x♯, g♭, g♯, the bound classification indices (free, lower-bounded, upper-bounded, fixed), and the nonzero counts nnzj and nnzh . This metadata follows the NLPModels.jl specification, and solvers query it to allocate sparse structures and to select algorithmic options. 2. Inherits the four tuples and the parameter values θ from the ExaCore .3. Builds the backend-specific extension ext when a GPU backend is active. This is the only step that analyzes the model. The gradient contributions of all patterns are collected, sorted by target variable, and partitioned by pointer arrays, which yields the sparse-to-dense compression map used by the GPU gradient path (Section 7.2.3). The same structure is built for constraint augmentations, and the device-side work buffers are allocated. The per-iteration callbacks can then launch with no further host-side preparation. On a CPU, no extension is built, and the instantiation reduces to reorganizing the data above. 

18 4. Initializes an NLPModels.Counters object to track callback invocations during the solve. The resulting ExaModel is a subtype of NLPModels.AbstractNLPModel {T,VT }, where T is the floating-point type and VT is the array type ( Vector {T} for CPU, CuArray {T} for CUDA, etc.). Its type has the form 

ExaModel {T, VT, E, V, P, O, C, ... }, where E is the type of the backend extension ext (Nothing on CPU) and V, P, O, C are the tuple types carried unchanged from the ExaCore . As with the core, a few further parameters for tags and references are not shown. An ExaModel can therefore be passed directly to any solver in the JSO ecosystem, including Ipopt (via NLPModelsIpopt.jl) and MadNLP.jl (Shin, Pacaud, and Montoison, 2025), without any adapter code. For each solver callback introduced in Section 2.1, ExaModels.jl dispatches to loops over the stored SIMDFunction s. 

## 3.3 Handles and Pattern Wrappers 

The internal types described below connect the two containers above to the expression trees of Section 4 and the AD machinery of Section 5. Most of them appear inside both the ExaCore and the ExaModel . They are the variable and parameter handles, the wrapper types stored in the obj and cons tuples, and the 

SIMDFunction that each wrapper holds. The node types underneath the SIMDFunction are the subject of Section 4. 

3.3.1 Variable and Parameter 

Each call to @add var or @add par declares a block of variables or parameters, possibly with multiple dimensions. Indices such as x[i] are local to the declared block, whereas solver callbacks operate on the global vectors x and θ formed by concatenating all variable and parameter blocks. Translating a block-local index into a global index therefore requires the block’s offset: if a block begins after offset scalar entries, its local entry i is stored at global index offset + i . The var and par tuples store lightweight handle types that record this mapping, rather than the numerical data itself. A Variable {S,O,T }, the handle returned by @add var , contains: 

• size::S : the block’s shape (a tuple of dimensions); general tensor blocks of arbitrary dimension are supported, with vectors and matrices as special cases. 

• length::O : the total number of scalar entries in the block. 

• offset::O : the offset that translates a block-local variable index into its index in the global primal vector x.

• name::Symbol : the variable’s name, captured automatically from the identifier in @add var(core, x, ...) and making the handle accessible as core.x .

• tag::T : optional user metadata, e.g. a scenario or batch-instance identifier for the two-stage and batch models of Sections 7.4.2 and 7.4.3. Indexing the handle as x[i] inside a later expression produces the symbolic variable reference of Section 4, and solution(result, x) uses the offset and size to slice the block’s values out of the solution vector. A Parameter {S,O,T }, the handle returned by @add par , carries the same bookkeeping except for the name: 

• size::S , length::O : the block’s shape and number of entries; as with variables, general tensor blocks of arbitrary dimension are supported. 

• offset::O : the offset that translates a block-local parameter index into its index in the global parameter vector θ.

• tag::T : optional user metadata, as for Variable .

19 Parameter values can be updated with set value! without rebuilding the model. Both handles are pure bookkeeping: they carry offsets and sizes, not arrays, which is consistent with the array-free design of Section 4. The numerical data, such as x0 , lvar , uvar , and θ, are stored separately in the flat arrays of the ExaCore .Declaring a block also extends the corresponding numerical arrays by one entry per scalar in the block. A call to @add var appends the block’s initial values to x0 and its lower and upper bounds to lvar and uvar . Their defaults are 0, −∞ , and + ∞, respectively, and the user may replace each default with a scalar, array, or generator. Similarly, @add par appends the block’s values to the global parameter array θ, using 0 by default. 

3.3.2 Objective, Constraint, and ConstraintAugmentation 

Each entry in the objective and constraint tuples of an ExaCore or ExaModel is one of three wrapper types, each pairing a SIMDFunction with the data over which it is evaluated. The contents and role of the 

SIMDFunction are described in Section 3.4. These collections are stored as Julia tuples rather than arrays, so that the concrete type of every wrapper appears explicitly in the top-level ExaCore or ExaModel type, down to the type of its SIMDFunction and expression tree. For example, two objective patterns are represented by a heterogeneous tuple such as Tuple {Objective {F1,I1 }, Objective {F2,I2 }} , which preserves the distinct types F1 and F2 . A Vector {Objective }, by contrast, would erase those distinctions behind the abstract 

Objective type and require dynamic dispatch during evaluation. The var tuple follows the same principle. Because extending any of these tuples changes its type, each addition reconstructs the core with a new concrete top-level type, as detailed in Section 7.1.1. An Objective {F,I } corresponds to one objective pattern ˜f (ℓ) in (3a) and contains: 

• f::F : the SIMDFunction constructed from the pattern. 

• itr::I : the collected data iterator over which the pattern is evaluated. A Constraint {F,I,O,S,T } corresponds to one base constraint pattern ˜ g(m) in (3b) and adds bookkeeping for the block’s location: 

• f::F , itr::I : the SIMDFunction and the data iterator, as above. 

• offset::O : the block’s offset into the global constraint vector. 

• size::S : the block’s dimensions. 

• tag::T : optional user metadata, as for Variable .A ConstraintAugmentation {F,I,D,T } corresponds to an augmentation pattern ˜h(n) in (3b). Its 

SIMDFunction wraps an expression tree of the form idx => value , where the index expression selects which 

constraint row to augment and the value expression supplies the additive term: 

• f::F , itr::I : the SIMDFunction and the data iterator. 

• oa::Int : the base offset of this augmentation’s terms in the GPU augmentation buffer. Each term is first written to its own position in this buffer and is subsequently accumulated into its target constraint row. The target constraint block’s base row is instead encoded by f.o0 .

• dims::D : the dimensions of that original constraint block, used to map index expressions to rows. 

• tag::T : optional user metadata, as for Variable .To see why ConstraintAugmentation is needed, consider the active power balance constraint in ACOPF: 

X

> g∈G b

pg − pdb = X

> (b,j )∈E

pf 

> bj

+ X

> (j,b )∈E

pt

> jb

, ∀b ∈ B ,

20 where Gb is the set of generators at bus b, and pf 

> bj

and pt 

> jb

are the flows on the lines incident to b, each measured at the b end of its line. With line losses, the power entering a line at one end differs from the power leaving it at the other, so each end carries its own flow variable. Each flow variable is the power the bus sends into the line at its end, so every incident line contributes to the balance with the same sign, whether the bus is the from end or the to end of the line. Each bus has a different number of generators and incident lines, so the full expression cannot be written as a single parameterized tree evaluated over buses. The tree structure 

varies from bus to bus, which violates the SIMD requirement that all data points share the same tree. With @add con! , the constraint is instead built in layers:  

> 1

# base pattern: one row per bus  

> 2

@add_con(core, c_p, b.pd for b in bus_data)  

> 34

# generator injection  

> 5

@add_con!(core, c_p, g.bus =>-pg[g.i] for g in gen_data)  

> 67

# line flow (from and to ends)  

> 8

@add_con!(core, c_p, l.from =>pf[l.i] for l in line_data)  

> 9

@add_con!(core, c_p, l.to =>pt[l.i] for l in line_data) 

The accumulated residual is demand plus line flows minus generation, which is the zero-valued form of the balance equation above. Each @add con! call creates a separate ConstraintAugmentation with its own fixed-structure expression tree and its own data iterator. The augmentation mechanism accumulates all contributions into the correct constraint rows at evaluation time. Without it, the user would have to write one large expression per bus that inlines every generator and line contribution, which destroys the pattern–data separation and blocks SIMD and GPU parallelism. More broadly, @add con! applies whenever a constraint sums over heterogeneous sets. Reactive power balance in ACOPF has the same structure, as do nodal flow balance constraints in optimal control on networks. The augmentation mechanism makes the number of distinct patterns scale with the number of types of contributions (generator, line-from, line-to), not with the number of constraints or the network topology. 

## 3.4 SIMDFunction: The Unit of Callback Work 

The parameterized expression tree, described in Section 4, captures only the algebraic structure of a pattern. Its Var leaves record which variables the pattern reads (Section 4.2.2), but the tree knows nothing else about the surrounding NLP model. It does not know whether it contributes to the objective or to the constraints. It does not know which data iterator it will be evaluated over, where its values and derivative nonzeros belong in the global output arrays, or how repeated derivative contributions should be merged. Turning the tree into a unit of callback work therefore takes additional bookkeeping. A SIMDFunction {F,C1,C2 } attaches the output offsets, the per-data-point strides, and the sparse compressor mappings to the expression tree. The data iterator is held by the enclosing Objective or Constraint , which pairs it with the SIMDFunction . Constraints also carry their row and shape metadata. The SIMDFunction is built at model-construction time by probing the expression tree for sparsity and building the compressor maps. It is the unit of work for both CPU loops and GPU kernels (Section 6), and it contains: 

• f::F : the parameterized expression tree representing the algebraic pattern. Its node structure and construction are discussed in Section 4. 

• comp1::C1 , comp2::C2 : Compressor mappings from reverse-pass visits to unique sparse output entries. The first-order mapping comp1 is used for gradient/Jacobian entries, whereas the second-order mapping 

comp2 is used for Lagrangian Hessian entries. Their construction and role in merging repeated contributions within a pattern are described in Section 5.2.2. 

21 • o0 , o1 , o2 , o1step , o2step : offset and stride integers, one offset per derivative order. The offsets locate this pattern’s entries in the shared output arrays, namely the function values, the gradient and Jacobian nonzeros, and the Lagrangian Hessian nonzeros. The strides record how far the write position advances from one data point to the next. Together they let each pattern write directly into its own slice without collisions; the formula for the write position is given in Section 5.3. 

# 4 Parameterized Expression Tree 

During model creation, ExaModels.jl captures each user-supplied generator body as a single parameterized expression tree : a Julia data structure that represents one algebraic pattern of (3) and is evaluated at every data point of that pattern. The word parameterized refers to the data-point index i, which is left as an undetermined parameter. Each leaf that depends on the data point records only how to fetch its value once i is known, such as which variable index or which data field, and not the value itself. Supplying a concrete i at evaluation time instantiates the tree for that data point by a forward pass, without copying it or allocating a new one. Keeping the decision variables symbolic is standard in symbolic expression-tree generation. Extending the same treatment to the data-point index is not standard, and it is what lets one tree serve an entire family of expressions rather than one tree per scalar expression. For a constraint pattern g(m) in (3b), the algebraic template becomes the expression tree stored by a 

SIMDFunction . The data points q(m) 

> j

become the data iterator itr stored by the enclosing Constraint , and objective patterns are represented in the same way by Objective . Evaluating a constraint row instantiates this shared tree at the corresponding element i of itr . The remaining ingredients of the SIMDFunction ,namely the compressor maps and the output offsets, are deferred to Section 5. The defining design decision is to keep the array data entirely separate from the tree. The tree refers to decision variables, parameters, and data-point fields only symbolically, by the index or access path needed to fetch each value. It therefore carries no array data of its own and is fully immutable. This is what lets the explicit typing of Section 3 reach every node. Each node type is parameterized by the types of its children, so nesting produces a tree whose type encodes the node itself and its entire subtree, and the type of the root alone determines the algebraic structure of the pattern. The compiler can then specialize a dispatch-free evaluator for each pattern. The tree is also a bits type, because it is array-free and concretely typed, so it can be passed directly as a GPU kernel argument, with the numerical data supplied alongside as device arrays (Section 6). 

## 4.1 Tree Construction from the Modeling Syntax 

A parameterized expression tree is not a distinct data structure but a composition of nested nodes, each holding its children as fields. The user never writes those nodes. They are built incrementally by Julia’s multiple dispatch as the ordinary expression in an @add obj or @add con declaration (Section 2.2.2) is evaluated. Each operation in the expression wraps the nodes its operands have already become, so the tree grows outward from the leaves as evaluation proceeds. Section 4.2 catalogues the node types in full. 

4.1.1 Building Nodes from the Bottom Up 

Construction starts from the source nodes , which stand in for the vectors and the data point that a pattern is written against. They are VarSource for the decision variables x, ParameterSource for the parameters θ,and DataSource for the current data point. Indexing or field access on a source node does not read a value. It returns an indexed node that records how the value will be fetched once a data point is supplied:  

> 1

julia> x = VarSource(); θ= ParameterSource(); i = DataSource();  

> 23

julia> x[2]  

> 4

Var  

> 5

x[2] 

> 6

22 7 julia> θ[2]  

> 8

ParameterNode  

> 9

θ[2]  

> 10 11

julia> i[1]  

> 12

DataIndexed  

> 13

i[1]  

> 14 15

julia> i.a  

> 16

DataIndexed  

> 17

i.a 

A node prints as the mathematical expression it stands for, with the decision-variable vector, the parameter vector, and the data point shown as x, θ, and i. Those names are fixed by the printer rather than taken from the variable a source is bound to, so we bind the sources to the same names here. The expression 

x[2] invokes getindex(x, 2) . Because x is a VarSource , multiple dispatch selects getindex(::VarSource, ...) and returns a Var node instead of reading an array element. The indices used so far have been literals. The parameterization enters when an indexed node itself serves as the index of a variable or a parameter.  

> 1

julia> x[i[1]]  

> 2

Var  

> 3

x[i[1]]  

> 45

julia> θ[i.a]  

> 6

ParameterNode  

> 7

θ[i.a] 

Neither expression names a particular entry of x or θ. Each records the access path by which the entry will be determined once a data point is supplied. A single node therefore stands for a different variable at every data point, and one tree serves an entire pattern. This is what the word parameterized refers to, and it is the property that the rest of the construction preserves. These indexed nodes are the ingredients of larger expressions. Applying an ordinary Julia function or operator to one builds a further node rather than computing a number, because each registered function (Section 7.1.4) carries an overload for AbstractNode operands. The results are the general nodes Node1 and Node2 , for unary and binary operations respectively:  

> 1

julia> x[2]^2  

> 2

Node1{abs2}  

> 3

x[2]^2  

> 45

julia> sin(x[2])  

> 6

Node1{sin}  

> 7

sin(x[2])  

> 89

julia> exp(x[1]) + x[2]  

> 10

Node2{+}  

> 11

exp(x[1]) + x[2]  

> 12 13

julia> x[i[1]] * θ[i[2]]  

> 14

Node2{*}  

> 15

x[i[1]] * θ[i[2]] 

23 In each case the function or operator itself is carried in the node’s first type parameter, so the algebraic form of the pattern is fixed at compile time. Applied repeatedly, this yields the complete parameterized expression tree. 

4.1.2 From a Model Declaration to a Tree 

The construction above proceeded upward, one expression at a time, with the nodes written out by hand. From a single @add obj or @add con statement in the modeling syntax of Section 2.2.2, the same machinery produces the tree for a whole pattern without the user naming a single node. Consider the extended Rosenbrock function: min 

> x∈RN
> N

X

> i=2

100( x2 

> i−1

− xi)2 + ( xi−1 − 1) 2. (4) In ExaModels.jl, this is specified as a single objective pattern:  

> 1

@add_obj(core, 100(x[i-1]^2 - x[i])^2 + (x[i-1] - 1)^2 for i in 2:N) 

Julia lowers the generator into a one-argument function f = i -> 100*(x[i-1]^2 - x[i])^2 + (x[i-1] -1)^2 , paired with the range 2:N that supplies its data points. The name x inside the body is the variable handle declared by @add var , which the function captures from the enclosing scope. To construct a single expression tree for this pattern, ExaModels.jl calls f once, with i = DataSource() . This one source-node argument turns f into a probe of its own algebraic structure: each operation builds a symbolic node. The tree is built step by step through multiple dispatch. When the generator body is evaluated with this source node: 1. i - 1 dispatches to -(::AbstractNode, ::Real) , returning a Node2 with the DataSource and the constant as children; 2. x[i-1] dispatches to getindex on the variable handle x. This appends the offset of the variable block within the global decision vector, which is zero in this example, and returns a Var node owning the resulting index subtree; 3. x[i-1]^2 lowers to Base.literal pow with the exponent carried as Val {2}, applying the simplification rule ( ·)2 → abs2( ·) and returning a Node1 {abs2,... };4. the subtraction, outer square, multiplication by 100, and addition each dispatch similarly, constructing 

Node2 nodes. No loop is unrolled during model construction: the final result is a single expression tree whose Var leaves resolve variable indices from the data point at evaluation time. The same tree is evaluated for each 

i ∈ { 2, . . . , N }, with different data producing different variable indices and hence different function values and derivatives. This is the parameterized aspect: one tree serves all N − 1 data points, and its evaluation functions are compiled only once. It is the key to SIMD evaluation and GPU acceleration. The result is a single value whose type spells out the entire algebraic structure of the pattern. That type is long, so ExaModels.jl abbreviates it when a node is displayed. The fulltype function prints it in full:  

> 1

julia> N = 10; core = ExaCore(concrete = Val(true));  

> 23

julia> @add_var(core, x, N); i = DataSource();  

> 45

julia> fulltype(100*(x[i-1]^2 - x[i])^2 + (x[i-1] - 1)^2)  

> 6

Node2{typeof(+),Node2{typeof(*),Int64,Node1{typeof(abs2),  

> 7

Node2{typeof(-),Node1{typeof(abs2), 

24 Node2                                

> +
> Node2
> ×Node1
> abs2
> Int
> 100 Node1
> abs2
> Node2
> −
> Node2
> −
> Var
> xi−1
> Int
> 1
> Node1
> abs2
> Var
> xi
> Node2
> +
> Var
> xi−1
> Node2
> +
> Node2
> −Int
> 0
> Node2
> +DataSource
> iInt
> 0DataSource
> iInt
> 1
> Node2
> −Int
> 0
> DataSource
> iInt
> 1
> 100( x2
> i−1−xi)2+ ( xi−1−1) 2
> 100( x2
> i−1−xi)2
> (x2
> i−1−xi)2
> x2
> i−1−xi
> x2
> i−1
> (xi−1−1) 2
> xi−1−1(i−1) + 0
> i+ 0 (i−1) + 0
> x[i−1]

Figure 3: Parameterized expression tree for the Rosenbrock pattern 100( x2 

> i−1

− xi)2 + ( xi−1 − 1) 2. Gray circles are general nodes; colored circles are variable, constant, and source nodes. The dashed box encloses the index subtree of x[i − 1]. 

8 Var{Node2{typeof(+),Node2{typeof(-),DataSource,Int64},Int64}}}, 

9 Var{Node2{typeof(+),DataSource,Int64}}}}},Node1{typeof(abs2), 

10 Node2{typeof(-),Var{Node2{typeof(+),Node2{typeof(-),DataSource,Int64},Int64}}, 

11 Int64}}} 

Every operation, every operand, and the index arithmetic inside each Var appear in the type, which is what allows the compiler to specialize the evaluation of this pattern (Section 4.2.3). Figure 3 shows the expression tree for this pattern. General nodes carry their operation as a type parameter, and source and constant nodes supply the inputs. Each Var node contains a subtree that computes the variable index from the data point i. The reference x[i-1] becomes a Var node whose index subtree combines the DataSource leaf with two integer constants and evaluates ( i − 1) + 0. The trailing constant is the offset of the variable block x within the global decision vector, which is zero in this example. At evaluation time the subtree resolves to the index i − 1, so the same tree evaluates 100( x21 − x2)2 + ( x1 − 1) 2 when i = 2, 100( x22 − x3)2 + ( x2 − 1) 2 when i = 3, and so on for the remaining data points. 

4.1.3 Forms of the Data Iterator 

The model declarations so far iterate over 2:N , the obvious choice when a pattern is indexed by an integer. The data iterator is not restricted to a range. It may be any collection whose elements the pattern accesses, because those accesses are captured symbolically. The getindex , getproperty , and indexed iterate methods on 

DataSource all return DataIndexed nodes, so an element may be addressed by position or by field name. The elements must be concretely typed, so that the access paths resolve at compile time. For GPU execution they must additionally be bits types, since the data iterator is copied to the device and the kernel receives it 

25 as an argument. A tuple carries the data by position, and the element may be indexed or destructured:  

> 1

data = [(100.0, k-1, k) for k in 2:N]  

> 23

@add_obj(core, d[1]*(x[d[2]]^2 - x[d[3]])^2 + (x[d[2]] - 1)^2 for d in data)  

> 4

@add_obj(core, c*(x[i]^2 - x[j])^2 + (x[i] - 1)^2 for (c, i, j) in data) 

The two declarations produce the same tree: destructuring dispatches to indexed iterate on the DataSource ,which returns the same DataIndexed nodes that explicit indexing does. A named tuple carries the data by name instead, which is clearer when a pattern has several fields:  

> 1

data = [(coef = 100.0, i = k-1, j = k) for k in 2:N]  

> 23

@add_obj(core, d.coef*(x[d.i]^2 - x[d.j])^2 + (x[d.i] - 1)^2 for d in data) 

A user-defined struct behaves exactly as the named tuple does, since the field accesses resolve through the same getproperty overload:  

> 1

struct Arc  

> 2

coef::Float64  

> 3

i::Int  

> 4

j::Int  

> 5

end  

> 67

data = [Arc(100.0, k-1, k) for k in 2:N]  

> 89

@add_obj(core, a.coef*(x[a.i]^2 - x[a.j])^2 + (x[a.i] - 1)^2 for a in data) 

Nested combinations of these forms work in the same way. In each case the field name or position becomes part of the DataIndexed type parameter, so the access path is fixed at compile time and involves no runtime lookup. 

## 4.2 Node Types 

The node types fall into three families: the leaves, which either stand for the vectors and the data point or carry a constant value; the indexed nodes obtained from the source nodes; and the general nodes that apply registered functions and operators. 

4.2.1 Leaf Nodes 

The leaves are of two kinds: the source nodes , which record where a value will be fetched once a data point is supplied, and constants, which carry a value directly. 

• VarSource : the decision-variable vector x. Indexing it produces a Var node. 

• ParameterSource : the parameter vector θ. Indexing it produces a ParameterNode , and it appears only in models that carry parameters (Section 2.1). 

• DataSource : the current data point. It admits field access as well as indexing, so a structured data point can be addressed by name, and either form produces a DataIndexed node. 

• Real : a literal coefficient is not wrapped at all. It is carried as a plain Julia number in the child field of the general node above it, which is why a general node’s children are typed as AbstractNode or Real .

• Constant {V}: a constant that carries its value V in its type rather than in a field, so the value is available at compile time (Section 7.1.3). 

26 VarSource and ParameterSource exist only to be indexed; a pattern never refers to the whole vector x

or θ at once. A DataSource is different: when the data point is itself the quantity a pattern needs, it is used directly rather than indexed. The Rosenbrock declaration of Section 4.1.2 is such a case, since its data iterator 2:N yields plain integers and the pattern uses i as an index into x rather than reading a field of it. The Var , ParameterNode , and DataIndexed nodes that indexing produces are the subject of Section 4.2.2. 

4.2.2 Indexed Nodes 

The indexed nodes produced from the source nodes are: 

• Var {I}: a decision-variable access x[i] , where the index type I may be a literal or a data-dependent subtree, so the index itself is computed from the data point. 

• DataIndexed {I,J }: the lookup inner.J or inner[J] , where I is the type of the inner node being indexed into and J is the field name or index itself. Indexing the data point i at position 1 gives 

DataIndexed {DataSource, 1 }, and accessing its field a gives DataIndexed {DataSource, :a }. The inner node may itself be a DataIndexed , so a nested access path such as i.a[2] is expressed by nesting the type, as DataIndexed {DataIndexed {DataSource, :a }, 2 }. Since J is carried in the type , the access compiles to a direct getfield or getindex with no runtime lookup. 

• ParameterNode {I}: a model-parameter access θ[i] , produced by indexing the ParameterSource leaf. As with Var {I}, the index type I may be a literal or a data-dependent subtree, so a parameter entry can also be selected by the data point. 

4.2.3 General Nodes 

The general nodes come in two forms, distinguished by the number of arguments: 

• Node1 {F,I }: a univariate operation f with F = typeof(f) and a single child subtree of type I,evaluating as f(inner(i, x, θ)) ;

• Node2 {F,I1,I2 }: a bivariate operation f with F = typeof(f) and two child subtrees of types I1 , I2 ,evaluating as f(inner1(i, x, θ), inner2(i, x, θ)) .ExaModels.jl supports only univariate and bivariate functions as building blocks, so an n-ary operation such as a sum of several terms is represented as a chain of nested nodes rather than a single wide node. The type parameters are what make this representation more than a bookkeeping device. The operation is carried in F, so two nodes with different operations are different concrete types, and the child types I (or I1 ,

I2 ) record the subtrees in full. Together with the parameters carried by Var {I}, DataIndexed {I,J }, and 

Constant {V}, the entire nesting structure of an expression is therefore part of its type. The expression x2

> i−1

,for instance, has a type of the form 

Node1 {typeof(abs2), Var {Node2 {typeof(+), ... }}} .This is the explicit-typing principle of Section 3 carried furthest: a complete pattern is one deeply nested concrete type, with no abstractly typed field anywhere on the evaluation path. The compiler can therefore inline and specialize the evaluation code for each pattern. Different patterns are different types, so it produces a separate specialized routine for each, which is what makes SIMD evaluation and GPU kernel compilation possible. 

4.2.4 The Root 

The outermost node of the tree is called the root , but it is not a distinct node type. It is simply the general, indexed, or constant node that represents the complete algebraic pattern and is stored in the f field of the 

SIMDFunction (Section 3.3). Its role is to be the entry point: evaluating the pattern at a data point means calling the root, which calls its children in turn. Section 4.3 describes that traversal. 

27 4.3 Node Evaluation 

Every node <: AbstractNode is callable with the standard evaluation arguments, node(i, x, θ), and the call returns a scalar. Here i is the data point, that is, the element of the data iterator, x is the variable vector, and θ is the parameter vector, which is unused when the model carries no parameters. Every node, and hence every expression tree, is evaluated through calls of this form. For example, a tree can be constructed and evaluated directly, and the same tree returns a different value at each data point:  

> 1

julia> x = VarSource(); i = DataSource();  

> 23

julia> node = 100 * (x[i-1]^2 - x[i])^2 + (x[i-1] - 1)^2;  

> 45

julia> node(2, [2.0, 3.0, 5.0], nothing)  

> 6

101.0  

> 78

julia> node(3, [2.0, 3.0, 5.0], nothing)  

> 9

1604.0 

Arithmetic on the source nodes assembles the tree by operator overloading, and each call evaluates that one tree at the given data point and variable values. The data point selects which entries of x the Var leaves read, which is why the two calls return different values. This tree reads no parameters, so the third argument is unused and may be passed as nothing . Evaluation descends from the root to the leaves: each general node evaluates its children and applies its operation, while the leaves read from the arguments. A Var node, for example, reads its entry of x, and a DataIndexed node extracts its field or entry from the data point i.At the individual node level, evaluation applies the function associated with the node type to the recursively evaluated children. For example, for every registered bivariate function f, the registration macro (Section 7.1.4) generates the Node2 evaluation method  

> 1

@inline (n::Node2{typeof(f),I1,I2})(i, x, θ) where {I1,I2} =  

> 2

f(n.inner1(i, x, θ), n.inner2(i, x, θ)) 

so calling a Node2 first evaluates its two child subtrees inner1 and inner2 through the same interface and then applies f to their values. A Node1 evaluates in the same way with a single child. When a child is a plain 

Real coefficient, a specialized method uses the stored value directly instead of recursing. Values therefore flow back up from the leaves to the root, and the call on the root returns the instantiation of the tree at the given data entry i, variables x, and parameters θ.Every use of the tree goes through this same call; only the type of the arguments varies. Called with numerical arguments, it computes the function value, which is the regular evaluation path used by the objective and constraint callbacks. Called with a derivative-carrying adjoint source in place of x, the identical traversal builds the computation graph from which the derivatives are evaluated, for both first- and second-order derivatives. This is the basis of the forward pass of the AD algorithm of Section 5. 

# 5 Sparse Automatic Differentiation 

The same evaluation call node(i, x, θ) that instantiates the tree also produces derivatives, once x is replaced by an input type that carries derivative information. The operator overloads then propagate derivatives through the same expression structure. The derivative evaluation itself (Section 5.1) is standard reverse-mode AD. The one difference is that it runs on the parameterized expression tree, so the same compiled code serves every data point of a pattern and the data points can be processed in parallel (Section 6). Second derivatives are obtained by reverse over reverse, rather than by the forward-over-reverse composition that machine learning frameworks generally use. 

28 The larger departure from common practice is in how the sparse Jacobian and Hessian are obtained. The usual route in a machine learning framework is to expose Jacobian–vector and Hessian–vector products. The sparse matrix is recovered from a sequence of such products, and the sequence is chosen by a graph coloring of the sparsity pattern. ExaModels.jl instead evaluates the nonzero entries directly, in a single pass per pattern. The sparsity pattern is determined a priori from the expression tree (Section 5.2), so no matrix–vector products are formed and no coloring is computed. 

## 5.1 Derivative Evaluation 

We focus on the first-order case, the gradient. The second-order case follows the same structure and is described at the end of this subsection. Consider one term of the extended Rosenbrock function (4), written in the two variables it involves, 

f (x1, x 2) = 100( x21 − x2)2 + ( x1 − 1) 2,

evaluated through the intermediates 

s = x21 − x2, t = x1 − 1, f = 100 s2 + t2.

Reverse-mode AD associates with every intermediate quantity v an adjoint ¯v = ∂f /∂v , the sensitivity of the output to that intermediate. The adjoint of the output itself is ¯f = 1. The chain rule then propagates adjoints backward through each elementary operation. If v = F (u1, u 2), each argument uj receives the contribution ¯v · ∂F/∂u j , the adjoint of the result times the local partial derivative of the operation. In the example, the backward traversal proceeds as ¯f = 1 , ¯s = 200 s, ¯t = 2 t, 

¯x1 = ¯ s · 2x1 + ¯ t · 1 = 400 x1(x21 − x2) + 2( x1 − 1) , ¯x2 = −¯s = −200( x21 − x2),

which are the entries of ∇f . A single backward traversal of these adjoints therefore yields the full gradient at a cost proportional to one function evaluation. ExaModels.jl follows this standard scheme, in the same two phases: a forward pass that evaluates the parameterized expression tree of Section 4 and records the local derivatives along the way, and a reverse pass 

that propagates adjoints from the root back to the leaves. 

5.1.1 Forward Pass 

The forward pass uses the node-evaluation machinery of Section 4.3. It is the ordinary evaluation call node(i, x, θ), with an AdjointNodeSource passed in place of x. No separate symbolic construction takes place. The evaluation produces the adjoint tree: a structure with the same shape as the original expression tree, in which each node carries its primal value and its local partial derivatives. The construction reuses the multiple dispatch mechanism of the primal tree, with the local derivative F ′ supplied by the function’s registered first derivative (Section 7.1.4). The first-order source AdjointNodeSource is a thin wrapper around the primal vector x. The pass evaluates the stored tree as node(i, AdjointNodeSource(x), θ). Indexing that source returns an AdjointNodeVar(i, x[i]) leaf, a variable node that also carries its primal value. As the operator overloads run on these leaves, each interior operation builds an AdjointNode1 or AdjointNode2 node (both <: AbstractAdjointNode )storing, alongside the primal value, the local partial derivatives of its operation: 

• AdjointNodeVar {I,T }: stores the variable index i and the primal value xi.

• AdjointNode1 {F,T,I }: for a unary F , stores v = F (u) and ∂F/∂u = F ′(u), where u is the child’s primal value. 

• AdjointNode2 {F,T,I1,I2 }: for a binary F , stores v = F (u1, u 2) and both partial derivatives ∂F/∂u 1,

∂F/∂u 2.

29 The second-order case is identical in structure: a SecondAdjointNodeSource seeds SecondAdjointNodeVar 

leaves, and the overloads build <: AbstractSecondAdjointNode nodes that also store second derivatives (Section 5.1.3). In both cases the adjoint tree is built during the forward pass and traversed back during the reverse pass. Figure 4 illustrates both passes on the Rosenbrock pattern. Evaluating x21x2 on an AdjointNodeSource returns the root of an adjoint tree rather than a number. Its fields hold the value of the subexpression and the local partial derivatives with respect to its children:  

> 1

julia> node = x[1]^2 * x[2];  

> 23

julia> g = node(nothing, AdjointNodeSource([3.0, 5.0]), nothing);  

> 45

julia> g.x, g.y1, g.y2 # value, and the two local partials  

> 6

(45.0, 5.0, 9.0)  

> 78

julia> g.inner1.x, g.inner1.y # the x[1]^2 child: value and d/dx[1]  

> 9

(9.0, 6.0) 

No global derivative has been computed at this point: each node knows only its own value and how it responds to its immediate children. Combining these local factors into the gradient is the work of the reverse pass. 

5.1.2 Reverse Pass 

The reverse pass traverses the adjoint tree from root to leaves, propagating the adjoint (sensitivity) ¯ v. The traversal is implemented by a family of reverse-pass functions that share this structure and differ only in where the results are written: drpass (dense gradient), grpass (sparse gradient), jrpass (sparse Jacobian), and the second-order hrpass and hdrpass (sparse Hessian). Each is discussed where it is used. Taking 

drpass as the representative: 

• At the root, ¯ v is set to the seed adjoint: 1 for the gradient and the Jacobian, and the multiplier λj of constraint j for the Hessian of the Lagrangian. 

• At AdjointNode1 {F} with stored derivative F ′: propagate ¯ v · F ′ to the child. 

• At AdjointNode2 {F} with stored partials ∂1F , ∂2F : propagate ¯ v · ∂1F to child 1 and ¯ v · ∂2F to child 2. 

• At AdjointNodeVar with index i: accumulate ¯ v into the gradient entry ( ∇f )i.Returning to the pattern above, the reverse pass multiplies these local factors along every path from the root and accumulates the products at the leaves:  

> 1

julia> y = zeros(2);  

> 23

julia> drpass(g, y, 1.0) # 1.0 is the seed adjoint at the root  

> 45

julia> y  

> 6

2-element Vector{Float64}:  

> 7

30.0  

> 8

9.0 

matching ∇(x21x2) = (2 x1x2, x 21) = (30 , 9) at x = (3 , 5). Here the gradient is dense and each leaf writes to its own variable index. For the sparse Jacobian and Hessian, the reverse pass writes instead into the nonzero positions of a coordinate (COO) array, which presupposes that those positions are already known. How they are determined, without graph coloring, is the subject of Section 5.2. 

30 5.1.3 Second-Order Derivatives 

The Hessian of the Lagrangian requires second-order derivatives, which are propagated in the same fashion as the first-order case. The expression tree is evaluated with SecondAdjointNodeSource(x) , producing a second-adjoint tree whose nodes also store the second derivatives of their operations ( h = F ′′ for unary nodes; 

h11 , h12 , h22 for binary nodes). The reverse pass then propagates the pair of first and second adjoints (¯ v, ¯v2)from root to leaves. At a unary node with y = F ′ and h = F ′′ , the child receives ¯ v · y and ¯ v2 · y2 + ¯ v · h,which is the work of hrpass . The companion hdrpass traverses pairs of subtrees and accumulates the mixed contributions ¯ v2 · y1y2 + ¯ v · h12 . At the leaves, hrpass accumulates ¯ v2 into the diagonal Hessian entry Hi,i .The function hdrpass accumulates into the entry Hi,j when its two subtrees reach variable leaves with indices 

i and j. The second-derivative work is skipped on affine nodes, whose h terms are zero, as described in Section 7.2.2. 

5.1.4 Worked Example: Gradient of the Rosenbrock Pattern 

Figure 4 recalls the parameterized tree of Figure 3 for the pattern of (4) and instantiates it at a concrete data point. For i = 2 and x = [2 , 3, . . . ] the variable references resolve to x1 and x2, and the tree evaluates to 

f2 = 101. We let s = x2 

> i−1

− xi and t = xi−1 − 1, so that one term of the objective is fi = 100 s2 + t2.The forward pass evaluates this tree bottom-up, with x replaced by an AdjointNodeSource so that every node also records its local derivatives (Figure 4). The inner abs2 node over xi−1 stores v = x2 

> i−1

and F ′ = 2 xi−1.The subtraction node s = x2 

> i−1

− xi stores ∂1 = 1 and ∂2 = −1. The outer abs2 stores v = s2 and F ′ = 2 s.The multiplication by 100 stores ∂1 = s2 and ∂2 = 100. The t = xi−1 − 1 and t2 nodes store their partials in the same way. The root + node holds the primal value v = 100 s2 + t2.The reverse pass then traverses the same tree from the root down (Figure 4), seeding the root adjoint ¯ v = 1 and multiplying by each node’s stored local derivative as it descends: 1. the root + sends ¯ v · 1 = 1 to each of its two children (the 100 s2 branch and the t2 branch); 2. at the multiplication node the 100 s2 branch receives 1 · 100 = 100, which the outer abs2 scales by 

F ′ = 2 s to send 200 s into the subtraction node; 3. the subtraction propagates 200 s · 1 = 200 s to the x2 

> i−1

subtree and 200 s · (−1) = −200 s to the leaf xi,accumulating −200 s into ( ∇f )xi ;4. the inner abs2 scales by its stored F ′ = 2 xi−1, so the leaf xi−1 receives 200 s · 2xi−1 = 400 s x i−1;5. on the other branch, the abs2 node applied to t sends 1 · 2t = 2 t through the t = xi−1 − 1 node to the leaf xi−1.Accumulating the two contributions at the shared leaf xi−1 yields ∂f i/∂x i−1 = 400 s x i−1 + 2 t and ∂f i/∂x i =

−200 s, which is the gradient of fi. At the data point of Figure 4, where s = t = 1 and x1 = 2, these are 

∂f 2/∂x 1 = 802 and ∂f 2/∂x 2 = −200. 

## 5.2 Sparsity Detection Without Coloring 

Sparse Jacobian and Hessian evaluation is commonly implemented with graph coloring (Gebremedhin, Manne, and Pothen, 2005). Structurally independent columns are grouped into colors, so that the whole derivative is recovered from one compressed evaluation per color. This is the mechanism behind the sparse AD of general modeling and machine learning frameworks, among them ADNLPModels.jl (Migot et al., 2025) in the JSO ecosystem and the coloring-based sparse Jacobian and Hessian routines available for JAX and PyTorch. All of them first detect a sparsity pattern, color it, and then evaluate one matrix–vector product per color. The number of evaluations is therefore the chromatic number of the pattern, which the framework must compute. The entries must afterwards be scattered from the compressed result back to their positions in the sparse matrix. 

31 Parameterized tree 

> (same as Figure 3, leaf nodes simplified)
> +
> ×
> 100  abs2
> −
> abs2
> xi−1
> xi
> abs2
> −
> xi−1 1
> Instantiation ( i = 2 , x = [2 , 3, . . . ])with forward and reverse passes
> +
> 101
> ×
> 100
> 100  abs2
> 1
> −
> 1
> abs2
> 4
> x1
> 2
> x2
> 3
> abs2
> 1
> −
> 1
> x1
> 2 1
> ∂1 = 1 , ∂ 2 = 100
> F ′ = 2
> ∂1 = 1 , ∂ 2 = −1
> F ′ = 4
> F ′ = 2
> ∂1 = 1 , ∂ 2 = −1¯v = 1 1·1 1·11·100 100 ·2200 ·1 200 ·(−1) 200 ·41·22·1(∇f )x1 += 800 (∇f )x2 +=  −200 (∇f )x1 += 2
> Forward (leaves to root: primal  v, local derivatives)  - - Reverse (adjoint ¯ v propagation)
> Figure 4:  The parameterized tree of one Rosenbrock pattern (left), and the same tree instantiated at the data point  i = 2 with  x = [2 , 3, . . . ], carrying the first-order AD passes (right). Green marks the forward pass and its stored local derivatives; maroon dashed arrows mark the reverse pass.

32 ExaModels.jl takes a different route. The SIMD abstraction fixes the structure of each pattern a priori at model-construction time. The exact structural sparsity layout can therefore be determined without coloring, before any derivative is computed. The reverse pass then writes each nonzero straight to its position in the COO array. No coloring is computed, no compressed evaluation is performed, and no scatter is needed. The entries so produced are not fully deduplicated. A variable that appears at more than one data point, or in more than one pattern, contributes a separate entry for each, and the solver sums them when it assembles the matrix. This is not peculiar to our route, since a coloring-based evaluation likewise produces a compressed array from which the entries must afterwards be recovered. The bookkeeping for this layout takes place at the SIMDFunction level. The stored expression tree serves as the template of the pattern’s algebraic structure, the Compressor merges repeated visits to the same variable into unique nonzero entries, and the offsets place each pattern’s entries in the global arrays. 

5.2.1 Probing the Tree with Sentinel Inputs 

For each pattern, ExaModels.jl performs a single probe evaluation of the expression tree using sentinel 

arguments: placeholder sources that stand in for the ordinary inputs. For the Rosenbrock pattern of (4), with 

obj the created Objective and f = obj.f.f its lifted function, the first-order probe proceeds as follows in the Julia REPL:  

> 1

julia> d = f(Identity(),  

> 2

AdjointNodeSource(NaNSource{Float64}()),  

> 3

NaNSource{Float64}());  

> 45

julia> raw = Any[];  

> 67

julia> grpass(d, nothing, nothing, nothing, raw, NaN);  

> 89

julia> raw  

> 10

3-element Vector{Any}:  

> 11

x[i - 1]  

> 12

x[i]  

> 13

x[i - 1] 

The primal vector x and the parameter vector θ are replaced by NaNSource {T} sentinels, and the data point 

i by an Identity sentinel. The numerical values these return are immaterial, since the probe records only which entries are touched. NaN is used so that any result that did depend on one would be visibly poisoned rather than plausible. Under these sentinels, the data-access nodes ( DataSource , DataIndexed ) evaluate to 

NaN , since no real data is available, while the Var nodes record which symbolic variable references are visited. The probe runs the same reverse-pass infrastructure used for ordinary derivative evaluation, grpass for first order and hrpass0 for second order. The only difference is at the leaves. With the Compressor argument set to nothing , a separate method makes each variable leaf record the symbolic variable reference it resolved, instead of accumulating a numeric value. Because the probe reuses that same infrastructure, every general node is visited in the identical order. The recorded sequence of nonzero positions therefore matches, entry for entry, the order in which the numeric passes will later write them. The three entries displayed above are the symbolic variable references visited in order: the first two from the term 100( x2 

> i−1

− xi)2 and the third from (xi−1 − 1) 2.

5.2.2 Compressor: Merging Repeated Leaf Visits 

The sequence raw collected by the probe may contain duplicates, for instance when xi appears more than once in the expression. Without merging them, the number of stored nonzeros would grow with the number of leaf visits rather than with the number of unique entries. The Compressor is a mapping from the position in raw to the unique nonzero index: 

33 1. Compute the list of unique variable references (for the gradient and Jacobian) or unique ( i, j ) pairs (for the Hessian) from raw .2. Build a mapping tuple: for each entry of raw , record which unique index it corresponds to. 3. Store this mapping in a Compressor {I}, whose type parameter I is an NTuple {N,Int } and so fixes the length N at compile time. Because the length is fixed in the type, looking up comp(cnt) is an inlined, constant-time operation with no runtime allocation. Continuing the Rosenbrock example in the REPL, the recorded sequence contains two unique references, which determine o1step = 2:  

> 1

julia> unique(raw)  

> 2

2-element Vector{Any}:  

> 3

x[i - 1]  

> 4

x[i] 

and mapping each position of raw to the unique entry it corresponds to gives the stored compressor:  

> 1

julia> obj.f.comp1  

> 2

Compressor{Tuple{Int64, Int64, Int64}}((1, 2, 1)) 

The first and third leaf visits accumulate into the first unique nonzero, and the second visit into the second. The second-order probe records four entries over three unique nonzeros, the two diagonal entries and one off-diagonal, yielding Compressor((1, 2, 3, 1)) with o2step = 3. Throughout, only the lower triangle (i ≥ j) of the symmetric Hessian is stored, following the NLPModels.jl convention. The resulting Jacobian and Hessian are stored in a partially compressed coordinate format, and the qualifier 

partially reflects where uniqueness has been resolved. At the level of an individual expression tree, the 

Compressor has already resolved it: duplicate entries arising from the same tree, such as those from a variable that appears more than once in one expression, are merged. Duplicates can still occur across different expression trees, and we deliberately do not compress across different patterns or across different data points of the same pattern. If two patterns contribute to the same ( i, j ) entry of the Hessian, they write to separate positions in the COO array. The final matrix is therefore only partially compressed, and a solver that requires a fully compressed format, such as compressed sparse column (CSC), must perform the remaining compression during its sparse matrix assembly. This design choice has two benefits. First, different patterns, and different data points within a pattern, never write to the same memory location, which removes write conflicts and allows lock-free parallel evaluation. Second, the same compiled kernel runs identically for every data point in a pattern, with only the offset advancing by a fixed stride, both on the CPU and the GPU. The trade-off is a larger COO array, proportional to the total number of pattern ×data-point contributions rather than to the number of unique structural nonzeros, which remains moderate for most applications. When a fully compressed format is needed, the conversion from COO to CSC carries a one-time cost for analyzing the sparsity structure. The repeated conversions that follow reuse a fixed structure, the typical case in nonlinear optimization, and are inexpensive. 

## 5.3 Callback Evaluation 

Each callback is implemented internally as a loop over patterns and data points, built from the expression trees, compressors, and offsets described above. The callback interface itself was introduced in Section 2.1. The zero-order callbacks NLPModels.obj and NLPModels.cons! are the simplest: the pattern’s tree is instantiated and evaluated at each data point. Objective terms are accumulated into the scalar objective value, and constraint values are written to their rows, located by the offset o0 .

5.3.1 Structure Callbacks 

The sparsity patterns themselves are exposed to the solver through the structure callbacks introduced in Section 2.1: 

34 1 2 1 2 1 2 · · · v: o1 o1step k = 1 k = 2 k = 3 cnt = 1 cnt = 2 cnt = 3 comp1 = (1, 2, 1) write position: o1 + (k-1)*o1step + comp1(cnt) 

Figure 5: Offset arithmetic for the sparse gradient of the Rosenbrock pattern, showing where each data point’s contributions are written in the global COO array. 

• NLPModels.jac structure! : fills the row and column index vectors i and j of the constraint Jacobian’s COO representation; 

• NLPModels.hess structure! : fills the corresponding index vectors of the Lagrangian Hessian. Both reuse the reverse-pass infrastructure of Section 5.1 once more. The passes run with NaN-backed sentinel sources (Section 5.2), and instead of accumulating numeric values, each variable leaf evaluates its variable index and stores it at the position determined by the Compressor (Section 5.2.2) and the offsets. The difference from the probe lies in what is instantiated: the probe is applied once per parameterized expression tree, whereas the structure evaluation is performed for each instantiation of the pattern. For data points 

k = 1 , . . . , N , the symbolic indices are resolved at the concrete data entry itr[k] . The resulting global row and column indices are written to the block [o1 + (k-1)*o1step + 1, ..., o1 + k*o1step] , and analogously with o2 and o2step for the Hessian. This loop runs over all data points of every pattern, but it is evaluated only once, at the beginning of the NLP solve. The numeric callbacks then refill only the value vector v at every iterate. 

5.3.2 Derivative Callbacks 

Everything described so far concerns a single algebraic pattern. A model holds several, stored as the obj and 

cons tuples of the ExaModel (Section 3.2). Each derivative callback applies the machinery of this section to each of them in turn, accumulating into the same global output array. What distinguishes one pattern’s contributions from another’s is where they are written, which is the role of the offsets carried by each 

SIMDFunction .The derivative callbacks first introduced in Section 2.1 are the dense gradient NLPModels.grad! , the sparse Jacobian NLPModels.jac coord! , and the sparse Hessian NLPModels.hess coord! . All three share the same mechanics. The reverse pass traverses the tree and counts the entry updates, incrementing a running counter 

cnt each time a leaf node is reached. The entry to update is offset + comp(cnt) , where offset locates the pattern’s block within the global COO array and comp(cnt) maps the counter to the correct slot among the pattern’s unique nonzeros. The offset advances by o1step (first order) or o2step (second order) for each data point, so data point k writes to positions [o1 + (k-1)*o1step + 1, ..., o1 + k*o1step] . Each data point has the same number of unique nonzeros, since that number is set by the pattern and not by the data. The offsets are therefore perfectly regular, and no dynamic bookkeeping is needed. Figure 5 illustrates this offset calculation for the gradient of the Rosenbrock pattern. 

• NLPModels.grad! (dense gradient): on the CPU, it runs the dense reverse pass drpass (Section 5.1), which accumulates each contribution ¯ v directly in place into the dense gradient vector. On the GPU, this direct accumulation would create race conditions, because threads evaluating different patterns may contribute to the same gradient entry at the same time. The GPU path therefore first evaluates a 

35 sparse but uncompressed gradient with grpass , each thread writing to its own conflict-free slot through the compressor and offsets. It then reduces that buffer into the dense gradient vector (Section 7.2.3). 

• NLPModels.jac coord! (sparse Jacobian): it loops over the collection of SIMDFunction s stored in the model (Section 3.4). For each pattern, the expression tree is instantiated at every data point and run through the sparse reverse pass jrpass (Section 5.1), which adds each contribution ¯ v to the COO value-vector entry v[offset + comp1(cnt)] . The Compressor (Section 5.2.2) merges the writes into the partially compressed form, and the offsets and strides stored in the SIMDFunction place each pattern’s block and advance the write position across data points. 

• NLPModels.hess coord! (sparse Hessian): it proceeds in the same way with the second-order passes 

hrpass and hdrpass (Section 5.1.3). Each diagonal and off-diagonal contribution is written into the COO value vector at the position determined by comp2 and the second-order offsets o2 and o2step 

(Section 3.4). 

# 6 GPU Kernel Generation 

ExaModels.jl evaluates models and their derivatives natively on the GPU. 

## 6.1 Selecting a GPU Backend 

Moving a model to the GPU takes one keyword argument at ExaCore construction. Nothing else in the model code changes:  

> 1

using ExaModels, CUDA, MadNLPGPU  

> 23

N = 10_000  

> 45

# CPU (default)  

> 6

core = ExaCore()  

> 78

# NVIDIA GPU: the only change on the user side  

> 9

core = ExaCore(backend = CUDABackend())  

> 10 11

# everything that follows remains the same  

> 12

@add_var(core, x, N; start = (mod(i,2)==1 ? -1.2 : 1.0 for i=1:N))  

> 13

@add_obj(core, 100(x[i]^2 - x[i+1])^2 + (x[i] - 1)^2 for i = 1:N-1)  

> 14

model = ExaModel(core)  

> 15

result = madnlp(model) # GPU-capable solver (MadNLPGPU.jl) 

The supported backends, provided through KernelAbstractions.jl (Churavy, 2025), are CUDA.jl (NVIDIA, 

CUDABackend() ), AMDGPU.jl (AMD, ROCBackend() ), oneAPI.jl (Intel), Metal.jl (Apple), and the CPU() 

backend for multithreaded execution on the host. The ExaCore then keeps all of its numerical arrays in the array type of the selected device. When the user supplies host arrays, for example as initial values or as parameter data, they are converted to that type as they are stored. Supplying the data in the device array type from the start avoids the conversion, but it is not required. The modeling syntax, the callbacks, and the solution access are the same as on the CPU. 

## 6.2 SIMDFunction as the Unit of Kernel Generation 

The SIMD abstraction of Section 2 expresses each pattern as a single function evaluated over a data iterator, and the parameterized expression tree of Section 4 is type-stable end to end, so the Julia compiler specializes a dedicated evaluator per pattern. The AD passes of Section 5 therefore map onto the device directly: each algebraic pattern becomes a GPU kernel, and each data point becomes a thread (Figure 6). All threads within a pattern execute the same compiled kernel and instantiate the same expression tree on different data 

36 expression tree (one pattern)  

> compiled kernel thread 1 thread 2 thread 3
> ...
> thread N
> v[o1+1 : o1+o1step] v[o1+o1step+1 : o1+2o1step] v[o1+2o1step+1 : o1+3o1step]
> ...
> v[o1+(N-1)o1step+1 : o1+No1step]
> itr[1] itr[2] itr[3] itr[N] one thread per data point disjoint output blocks (no race conditions)

Figure 6: Mapping of the SIMD abstraction onto a GPU. One kernel is compiled per algebraic pattern (left), one thread runs per data point (middle), and each thread writes to its own block of the output array (right). indices. The expression-tree structure therefore introduces no thread divergence, and every thread follows the same control flow, up to any branching inside the elementary functions themselves. This is well suited to GPU hardware. The implementation uses KernelAbstractions.jl for backend-agnostic kernels, written once with the @kernel macro and executed on any of the supported backends. The SIMDFunction of Section 3 is the unit of kernel generation. One kernel is compiled per pattern from its expression tree, and the Compressor mappings and offsets that the SIMDFunction carries tell each thread where to write. Within a pattern, the entries produced by data point k begin at o1 + ( k − 1) · o1step in the first-order output and at o2 + ( k − 1) · o2step in the second-order output. The strides o1step and o2step 

are the numbers of unique entries per data point, determined by the sparsity analysis of Section 5.2. A reverse-pass visit writes at that base plus the index returned by the corresponding compressor. Distinct data points therefore write to disjoint slices of the output arrays, and no two threads target the same position. The derivative kernels need no atomics and no locks. 

## 6.3 CPU vs. GPU Evaluation 

A GPU model exposes the same callback names as a CPU model, namely NLPModels.obj , NLPModels.cons! ,

NLPModels.grad! , NLPModels.jac coord! , and NLPModels.hess coord! . Julia’s multiple dispatch, keyed on the model’s backend and array types, selects the implementation. The two implementations of 

NLPModels.cons! follow, simplified to show the structure.  

> 1

# CPU (simplified)  

> 2

function NLPModels.cons!(  

> 3

model, x, g)  

> 4

for con in model.cons  

> 5

@simd for i in  

> 6

eachindex(con.itr)  

> 7

g[offset0(con, i)] +=  

> 8

con.f(con.itr[i],  

> 9

x, model. θ) 

> 10

end  

> 11

end  

> 12

end  

> 1

# GPU (simplified)  

> 2

function NLPModels.cons!(  

> 3

model, x, g)  

> 4

for con in model.cons  

> 5

kerf(model.ext.backend)(  

> 6

g, con.f, con.itr,  

> 7

x, model. θ; 

> 8

ndrange =  

> 9

length(con.itr))  

> 10

end  

> 11

end 

> 12

Both implementations loop over the constraint patterns in the same way. They differ only in the inner iteration over data points. On the CPU, a @simd for loop evaluates the parameterized expression tree 

37 con.f(con.itr[i], x, model. θ) one data point at a time, and the annotation lets the compiler vectorize across data points using CPU SIMD instructions. On the GPU, the loop body becomes the body of the KernelAbstractions.jl kernel kerf , launched over the data iterator.  

> 1

# one thread per data point  

> 2

@kernel function kerf(y, @Const(f), @Const(itr),  

> 3

@Const(x), @Const( θ))  

> 4

I = @index(Global)  

> 5

@inbounds y[offset0(f, itr, I)] = f(itr[I], x, θ) 

> 6

end @index(Global) provides the thread’s global index I, and the launch with ndrange = length(con.itr) 

assigns one thread per data point. Each thread instantiates the expression tree at its own data point itr[I] 

and writes the result at offset0(f, itr, I) , the per-data-point base position described above, so distinct threads write to disjoint positions. Because f is a compile-time-specialized expression tree and a bits type (Section 4.2.3), it is a valid kernel argument. The kernel also contains no dynamic dispatch, which GPU compilation requires. Multithreaded execution on the host is obtained the same way, by passing CPU() as the backend. No separate implementation and no thread-specific specialization is written for it. KernelAbstractions.jl compiles the same kernel body for the host and, at launch, divides the index range evenly among the available Julia threads, each of which runs the kernel over its own contiguous block of data points (Churavy, 2025). The kernel is therefore data-parallel in the same sense as on a GPU, and only the number of threads differs. This is the backend used for the multithreaded CPU results of Section 8.3. The same comparison applies to the sparse gradient:  

> 1

# CPU (simplified):  

> 2

# dense reverse pass  

> 3

function NLPModels.grad!(  

> 4

model, x, g)  

> 5

for obj in model.objs  

> 6

@simd for i in  

> 7

eachindex(obj.itr)  

> 8

drpass(  

> 9

obj.f(obj.itr[i],  

> 10

AdjointNodeSource(x),  

> 11

model. θ),  

> 12

g, 1.0)  

> 13

end  

> 14

end  

> 15

end  

> 1

# GPU (simplified):  

> 2

# sparse reverse pass  

> 3

function NLPModels.grad!(  

> 4

model, x, g)  

> 5

buf = model.ext.gradbuffer  

> 6

for obj in model.objs  

> 7

kerg(model.ext.backend)(  

> 8

buf, obj.f, obj.itr,  

> 9

x, model. θ, 1.0;  

> 10

ndrange =  

> 11

length(obj.itr))  

> 12

end  

> 13

compress_to_dense(g, buf)  

> 14

end 

> 15

On the CPU, each data point’s forward evaluation builds the adjoint tree, and the dense reverse pass drpass 

(Section 5.1) accumulates contributions directly into the dense gradient vector. On the GPU, the wrapper launches the kernel kerg into a sparse buffer, which is then compressed into the dense gradient (Section 7.2.3).  

> 1

# the AD pass in each thread  

> 2

@kernel function kerg(y, @Const(f), @Const(itr),  

> 3

@Const(x), @Const( θ), @Const(adj))  

> 4

I = @index(Global)  

> 5

@inbounds grpass(f(itr[I], AdjointNodeSource(x), θ),  

> 6

f.comp1, y, offset1(f, I), 0, adj)  

> 7

end 

38 Each thread runs the full forward and reverse pass: the forward evaluation on an AdjointNodeSource builds the adjoint tree, and grpass writes the contributions to the thread’s own slot of the buffer, at positions determined by the Compressor f.comp1 and the base offset offset1(f, I) . The Jacobian and Hessian kernels follow the same structure, calling jrpass and hrpass0 respectively. The only thing that changes is the top-level wrapper that distributes the work. The pattern is instantiated over its data points, and each instantiation, that is, each forward and reverse pass, is mapped to a GPU thread. The expression trees are bits types, meaning concretely typed, immutable, and free of references to host memory (Section 4.2.3), so they are passed to the kernels directly. The partially compressed COO output format (Section 5.2) keeps the evaluation free of race conditions. The GPU is well utilized as long as the model carries many data points. Several further implementation choices, namely the native COO output format, the objective’s buffer-then-reduce evaluation, the gradient’s sparse-then-compress path, and the restriction to data-level parallelism, are described in Section 7.2.3. 

# 7 Implementation Notes 

This section collects implementation details deferred from the preceding sections. Each item records a design or engineering choice that matters for using or extending ExaModels.jl but is not needed to follow the main development. 

## 7.1 Model Construction 

7.1.1 Immutable ExaCore and Reconstruction 

The central design choice that enables type stability is that ExaCore is an immutable struct rather than a 

mutable struct . As described in Section 3.1, each call to @add var , @add obj , or @add con extends the component tuples and returns a new ExaCore . The type parameters of the new core encode the exact set of patterns added so far, so its concrete type differs from that of the previous core. The Julia compiler sees these as distinct concrete types and generates specialized code for each construction step. By the time 

ExaModel(core) is called, the final ExaCore already holds all expression trees, Compressor tuples, and offset computations. The instantiation builds no new expression trees or sparsity structures, only the solver-facing metadata and backend workspaces described in Section 3.2. This design contrasts with JuMP (Lubin, Dowson, et al., 2023) and similar AMSs, where the model object is a mutable container that accumulates variables, constraints, and objectives behind a single stable type. In JuMP, each @variable , @constraint , and @objective mutates internal dictionaries within the same Model 

object:  

> 1

model = Model(Ipopt.Optimizer)  

> 23

@variable(model, x[1:N]) # mutates model  

> 45

@constraint(model, [i = 1:N-2], g(x, i) ==0) # mutates model  

> 67

@objective(model, Min, sum(f(x, i) for i = 1:N-1)) # mutates model 

This API is natural and convenient, but the model’s concrete type does not change across these calls. All structure is hidden in runtime data structures. The derivative evaluation code must therefore dispatch dynamically on the stored expression types, which rules out the compile-time specialization described in Sections 4.2.3 and 6.3. The ExaModels.jl macros @add var , @add obj , and @add con are designed to look like the JuMP convention while achieving the opposite effect. Each macro call rebinds the name core to a new ExaCore of a different concrete type, so the compiler can track the growing model structure statically. The user writes: 

39 1 core = ExaCore(concrete = Val(true))  

> 2

# core :: ExaCore..., Tuple, Tuple  

> 34

@add_var(core, x, N; start = (x0(i) for i = 1:N))  

> 5

# core :: ExaCore..., TupleVariable, Tuple  

> 67

@add_con(core, g(x, i) for i = 1:N-2)  

> 8

@add_obj(core, f(x, i) for i = 1:N-1)  

> 9

# core :: ExaCore..., TupleVariable, TupleObjective..., ...  

> 10 11

model = ExaModel(core) 

This reads like a conventional modeling script, but each line produces a new concrete type that the compiler can fully specialize. The mutating appearance is achieved purely by macro expansion: @add var(core, x, n) unrolls to  

> 1

local _var  

> 2

core, _var = add_var(core, n; name = Val(:x))  

> 3

x = _var 

The underlying function add var returns a new core together with the variable handle. The macro rebinds the name core in the calling scope to the new object and binds the handle to x. No object is ever mutated. Creating a new ExaCore at every declaration may appear expensive, but the cost is negligible. The struct holds only counters, handles, and references to the numerical arrays, so each rebind copies the references while the arrays themselves are never recreated. For the example above with N = 10 6, the struct occupies 144 bytes when empty and 176, 304, and 392 bytes after the variable, constraint, and objective declarations. Each increment is the declared handle or wrapper stored inline in the core’s tuples. These figures were measured on a 64-bit machine with ExaModels.jl v0.11.2 and may change slightly across versions. The struct therefore grows with the number of declared blocks and patterns, not with the number of data points. It stays small for the typical large-scale model, which has few patterns. 

7.1.2 Reusable Expression Objects 

The @add expr macro defines a subexpression that can be reused in objectives and constraints. For example,  

> 1

@add_expr(core, s, x[i]^2 for i = 1:N)  

> 2

@add_obj(core, (s[i] - 1)^2 for i = 1:N)  

> 3

@add_con(core, s[i] + s[i+1] for i = 1:N-1; ucon = 1.0) 

The first line returns an Expression named s. It adds no objective, constraint, callback, or independent algebraic pattern to the model. Each later reference s[i] substitutes the corresponding expression tree directly into the objective or constraint that uses it. The object can therefore be reused at several sites without introducing auxiliary variables or constraint rows. An Expression {S,F,I,T } stores the information needed to reconstruct a reusable subexpression at a selected index: 

• size::S and length::Int : the shape and number of scalar entries; 

• f::F : the generator function that constructs the subexpression tree; 

• iter::I : the collected data iterator used when the expression is indexed; and 

• tag::T : optional user metadata. 

40 The add expr function returns an updated ExaCore together with the Expression . An anonymous expression is returned to the caller without being stored in the core. The named form @add expr(core, s, ...) also records the object in refs , making it accessible as core.s or model.s . This entry is only a name-to-object association. The expression is never added to the obj or cons tuples, is never compiled into its own 

SIMDFunction , and is never evaluated as a callback. Indexing it as s[i] instead invokes its generator for that index and substitutes the resulting expression tree into the objective or constraint being built. One consequence is that a subexpression referenced at several sites is re-evaluated at each site rather than computed once and shared. We have found this sufficient for the use cases of ExaModels.jl, since the subexpressions that arise in practice are inexpensive to re-evaluate. 

7.1.3 Compile-Time Constants and Algebraic Simplification 

The Constant {V} node embeds its value V as a type parameter rather than a struct field. This means the constant occupies zero runtime storage and is fully resolved at compile time. The Julia compiler (and the AOT compiler juliac --trim=safe ) can propagate the value concretely through all downstream operations. This design also enables algebraic simplification at model-construction time. Trivial branches are collapsed before the expression tree is finalized. The identities applied automatically include the following: 

x + 0 → x, x · 1 → x, x/ 1 → x, x0 → 1, x1 → x,

x2 → abs2( x), x−1 → inv( x), 0 · x → 0, 0/x → 0. These rules reduce the depth of the expression tree and remove unnecessary operations. This matters most for GPU kernels, where every instruction counts. The simplification is exact, with no floating-point approximation, because it operates on the symbolic tree structure rather than on numeric values. Integer literal exponents reach the power rules through a lowering step in Julia rather than through the registered operators of Section 7.1.4. Such an exponent is lowered by the compiler to Base.literal pow ,with the exponent carried as a Val type parameter. The expression x[i]^2 therefore arrives at ExaModels.jl as literal pow(^, x[i], Val {2}) rather than as a call to ^ with the runtime value 2. The exponent is thus known to the method that builds the node, which is what allows x2 to be recorded as an abs2 node and 

x1 to be replaced by x. The derivative rules of abs2 are then used in place of the general power rule, and no exponent is stored or dispatched on at evaluation time. The other rules in the table fire when an operand is a 

Constant node, as in x−1 → inv( x). 

7.1.4 Function Registration 

For a function to appear in an ExaModels.jl expression, it must be registered . The system needs the function itself together with its first and second derivatives, which are required for the gradient, Jacobian, and Lagrangian Hessian computations of Section 5. ExaModels.jl provides two macros for this purpose: 

• @register univariate(f, df, ddf) : registers a unary function with its first and second derivatives. 

• @register bivariate(f, df1, df2, ddf11, ddf12, ddf22) : registers a binary function with its partial derivatives up to second order. Each macro generates the following method groups via multiple dispatch: 

• a primal method that constructs a Node1 or Node2 when applied to AbstractNode arguments; 

• a constant-folding method for Constant arguments; 

• a first-order adjoint method that constructs an AdjointNode1 or AdjointNode2 with the derivative values; 

• a second-order adjoint method that constructs a SecondAdjointNode1 or SecondAdjointNode2 ; and 

• an evaluation method that applies the function when the constructed node is called on a data point. 

41 ExaModels.jl v0.11.2 ships with 61 pre-registered function signatures (52 univariate and 9 bivariate), which cover the operations needed by most algebraic models: 

• arithmetic: +, − (unary and binary), ∗, /, and ^ (power); 

• exponential and logarithmic: exp , exp2 , exp10 , expm1 , log , log2 , log10 , log1p , sqrt , cbrt ;

• trigonometric: sin , cos , tan , csc , sec , cot ; the inverses asin , acos , atan (including the two-argument form), acot ; the degree variants sind , cosd , tand , cscd , secd , cotd , atand , acotd ; and sinpi , cospi ,

sinc ;

• hyperbolic: sinh , cosh , tanh , csch , sech , coth , and the inverses asinh , acosh , atanh , acoth ;

• utility: abs , abs2 , inv , sign , signbit , floor , ceil , max , min , hypot , deg2rad , rad2deg .Each signature is registered together with its first and second derivatives. Less common functions are provided through extension packages, so that the dependency is incurred only when needed. The ExaModelsSpecialFunctions extension is loaded when SpecialFunctions.jl is present. It registers erf , erfc , erfinv , gamma , digamma , trigamma , beta , the Bessel functions besselj0 , besselj1 ,

bessely0 , and bessely1 , and the Airy functions airyai and airybi , among others, all with the derivative rules required for AD. Beyond these, users can register custom functions with the same two macros. The registered derivatives enter the type system through multiple dispatch, so no modification of ExaModels.jl internals is required. 

## 7.2 Callback Implementation 

7.2.1 Compiler Specialization of the Callbacks 

The expression tree type is fully concrete and known at compile time (Section 4.2.3), and the AD traversal is annotated with @inline to force aggressive inlining. The Julia compiler therefore produces specialized machine code for each pattern with no interpretive overhead. Forcing inlining in this way is also what makes AOT compilation possible (Section 7.3.1). The generated code for a complete gradient kernel is reproduced in Section A. As detailed there, the kernel uses 13 floating-point operations against the best hand-written sequence of 12 that we could construct, and no unnecessary overhead is observable in the LLVM code. Each user-facing callback, namely the objective, constraint, gradient, Jacobian, and Hessian evaluations, thus compiles to a single piece of LLVM code, compiled once per model. This lets the compiler optimize the entire evaluation as a whole. All callbacks are also non-allocating on the CPU, so no garbage-collection pauses occur during the solve. The user writes natural mathematical expressions, dispatch builds the tree, and the compiler produces code whose performance is competitive with hand-written source transformations. 

7.2.2 Affine-Node Specialization 

Many expression trees contain long chains of affine operations (+, −, multiplication by a constant) whose second derivatives are identically zero. When a binary operation combines one subtree with a plain scalar, the adjoint construction reduces it to a unary node whose function is recorded as FirstFixed {F} or 

SecondFixed {F}. These wrapper types indicate that the first or the second argument of the binary function 

F is the fixed scalar. ExaModels.jl exploits this in the second-order reverse pass of Section 5 with hrpass0 , a specialized entry point that dispatches on the function type. For affine SecondAdjointNode1 nodes, such as FirstFixed {typeof(*) } and SecondFixed {typeof(+) }, the h term is known to be zero at compile time. The recursion then propagates only (¯ v · y, ¯v2 · y2) and never computes the ¯ v · h contribution. This removes unnecessary multiplications and additions from the inner loop, in particular for the common case of weighted sums of nonlinear terms. The specialization is selected by dispatch on the type of the expression tree, so the choice is resolved at compile time and no branch on the affine case remains in the generated code. 

42 7.2.3 GPU Evaluation Details Jacobian and Hessian evaluation with partial compression only. For Jacobian and Hessian evaluation, each data point in a pattern writes to its own contiguous block of the COO value array (Section 5.2). Different data points write to disjoint positions, so all writes are conflict-free and no atomics or synchronization are needed. This follows from the SIMD structure. Within a pattern, data point k has first-order block base offset o1 + ( k−1) · o1step , and a reverse-pass visit writes at that base plus the one-based index returned by 

comp1 . The second-order path uses o2 , o2step , and comp2 in the same way. ExaModels.jl therefore stores Jacobian and Hessian entries in the partially compressed COO format of Section 5.2 and does not further compress them to CSC format. Full compression would require sorting and merging entries. Avoiding it also suits solvers such as Ipopt (W¨ achter and Biegler, 2006) and MadNLP.jl (Shin, Pacaud, and Montoison, 2025), which accept COO input directly. 

Objective evaluation by buffering and reduction. The objective callback evaluates f (x) = 

P

> ℓ

PIℓ 

> i=1

˜f (ℓ)(pi, x, θ ). On the CPU, this sum is computed by direct scalar accumulation while iterating over patterns and data points (Section 6.3). No array of objective terms is formed, so the CPU objective path does not use o0 . On the GPU, direct accumulation by many threads would require atomics, so ExaModels.jl first evaluates the objective terms into a buffer of length P 

> ℓ

Iℓ. Each pattern’s o0 identifies the beginning of its disjoint slice of this buffer, and thread i writes its value at o0 + i . Once all pattern kernels have completed, a parallel sum reduction over the buffer produces the scalar objective value. Thus, unlike the CPU objective path, the GPU implementation requires the zero-order offset to place contributions before the subsequent reduction. 

Gradient evaluation by sparse pass and compression. On the CPU, the gradient is computed by the dense reverse pass drpass (Section 5.1), which accumulates each contribution ¯ v directly into the dense gradient vector. On the GPU, the sparse reverse pass grpass is used instead. Each thread writes its gradient contributions into a sparse buffer indexed by variable index and position, and a subsequent KernelAbstractions.jl kernel compress to dense reduces that buffer into the dense gradient vector. Two phases are needed because threads from different patterns may contribute to the same gradient entry, and atomic additions to a dense vector would cause contention:  

> 1

@kernel function compress_to_dense(  

> 2

y, @Const(y0), @Const(ptr), @Const(sparsity))  

> 3

I = @index(Global)  

> 4

@inbounds for j = ptr[I]:(ptr[I+1]-1)  

> 5

(k, l) = sparsity[j]  

> 6

y[k] +=y0[l]  

> 7

end  

> 8

end 

The ptr array partitions the sparse buffer entries by target variable, so each thread of the compression kernel handles a distinct set of target indices without conflicts. This partition, together with the sorted sparsity array, is computed once at ExaModel instantiation (Section 3.2). The evaluation of ConstraintAugmentation s uses the same strategy. Several augmentations may contribute to the same constraint entry, so their contributions are written into a separate buffer and reduced into the constraint vector by the same compress to dense 

kernel. 

Parallelism over data points only. ExaModels.jl parallelizes at the data-point level, so each thread executes the full forward–reverse AD pass for one data point of one pattern. The expression tree itself is never split across threads. This design keeps the kernel simple and avoids the synchronization overhead that splitting the tree traversal would incur. For typical NLP patterns, the expression trees are small, on the order of tens of nodes, so the parallelism from thousands of data points is more than enough to saturate GPU hardware. The result is high occupancy with minimal launch overhead, at one kernel launch per pattern per callback. 

43 7.3 Compile-Time Design 

7.3.1 Type Stability and Ahead-of-Time Compilation 

A Julia function is type-stable if the compiler can infer the concrete type of every variable and return value from the types of the arguments alone, with no runtime dispatch. GPU kernels require it, since dynamic dispatch is not supported on GPU hardware, and Julia’s AOT compiler juliac --trim=safe relies on it to produce standalone binaries with unused code eliminated. Type stability originates in the construction design of Section 3. The ExaCore is immutable, and each macro call produces a core of a new concrete type whose parameters encode the model built so far. The final type therefore determines the model structure completely, and every function invoked on the model is compiled specifically for that type. The construction-level details, including the contrast with mutable model containers such as JuMP’s, are given in Section 7.1.1. Because all ExaModels.jl code paths are type-stable, the entire model construction and solve pipeline is compatible with juliac --trim=safe . The compiler produces a standalone binary or shared library that runs without a Julia installation, since the required runtime libraries are bundled with the artifact. Combined with NLPModelsIpoptLite.jl, a lightweight AOT-compatible wrapper around the Ipopt C library, a complete optimization application can be packaged as a single executable:  

> 1

# RosenbrockApp.jl: compiles to a binary  

> 2

module RosenbrockApp  

> 3

using ExaModels, NLPModelsIpoptLite  

> 4

function (@main)(ARGS)  

> 5

N = parse(Int, ARGS[1])  

> 67

core = ExaCore(concrete = Val(true))  

> 8

@add_var(core, x, N; start = (mod(i,2)==1 ? -1.2 : 1.0 for i=1:N))  

> 9

@add_obj(core, 100(x[i]^2 - x[i+1])^2 + (x[i] - 1)^2 for i = 1:N-1)  

> 10 11

model = ExaModel(core)  

> 12

result = ipopt(model; print_level = 5)  

> 13

return result.status ==0 ? 0 : 1  

> 14

end  

> 15

end 

Running juliac --trim=safe --output-exe rosenbrock RosenbrockApp.jl produces a standalone bi-nary that solves the Rosenbrock problem for any N specified at the command line, with no JIT compilation latency. As of this writing, AOT compilation is supported for CPU backends only. GPU backends still require Julia’s JIT runtime for kernel compilation. A model, or an entire model library, developed with ExaModels.jl can be compiled together with a solver into a standalone binary, or into a shared library whose entry points are exposed to other programs. Developers can therefore build model libraries on ExaModels.jl without imposing a Julia-runtime dependence on their users. The library ships as a conventional compiled artifact that can be called from Python, C++, or any language with a C foreign-function interface, which eases deployment in production environments. 

7.3.2 Generic Numeric Precision 

Julia’s multiple dispatch and JIT compilation make the entire ExaModels.jl pipeline generic over the floating-point type. This covers expression tree construction, AD evaluation, and the solver callbacks. All internal code operates on the abstract type T <: AbstractFloat , and the compiler specializes automatically:  

> 1

core32 = ExaCore(Float32) # all arrays use Float32  

> 2

core64 = ExaCore(Float64) # all arrays use Float64 

44 This extends to user-defined numeric types, including simulated higher precisions. One example is the double-double type Double64 of DoubleFloats.jl (Sarnoff and JuliaMath, 2022), which simulates roughly quadruple precision with a pair of Float64 s. Another is Julia’s built-in arbitrary-precision BigFloat . Both run through the entire pipeline with no code changes beyond specifying the type at ExaCore construction. The Constant {V} type parameter (Section 7.1.3) ensures that compile-time constants are converted to the appropriate precision by replace T , so no mixed-precision artifacts arise. 

Float32 arithmetic is much faster than Float64 on consumer GPUs, and some hardware does not support double precision at all, not even through software emulation. Apple GPUs, targeted by the Metal backend, execute only single-precision arithmetic, and ExaModels.jl models run there entirely in Float32 . The same genericity also serves applications that require extended precision, such as sensitivity analysis near degeneracy. 

Implications for model libraries. Portability also propagates to model libraries built on top of ExaModels.jl, such as ExaModelsPower.jl and COPSBenchmark.jl. Such a library need only accept the numeric type and the backend as parameters, pass them to ExaCore(T; backend = backend, concrete = Val(true)) , convert its numerical data to T, and avoid type-unstable constructs. It then inherits arbitrary precision, every GPU backend, and AOT compatibility without further effort:  

> 1

function my_model(data; T = Float64, backend = nothing)  

> 2

core = ExaCore(T; backend = backend, concrete = Val(true))  

> 34

@add_var(core, x, length(data))  

> 5

@add_obj(core, f(x, d) for d in convert.(T, data))  

> 67

return ExaModel(core)  

> 8

end 

## 7.4 Two-Stage and Batch Structures 

The extensively studied classes of structured NLPs include two-stage stochastic programs (Birge and Louveaux, 1997; Lubin, Petra, et al., 2011; Chiang, Petra, and Zavala, 2014), graph-structured problems (Jalving, Shin, and Zavala, 2022; Cole and Zavala, 2024), and batch optimization (Amos and Kolter, 2017; Kim et al., 2025). Of these, the two-stage and batch structures are the ones aligned with the SIMD abstraction. Each adds an axis of repetition over which the same patterns are evaluated, so capturing it at the modeling level extends SIMD parallelism to the scenario and instance axes. Graph-induced structure is less amenable, since an irregular graph yields heterogeneous algebraic patterns. ExaModels.jl accordingly targets both structures within a single formulation. No separate data structures are needed, since every problem can be regarded as a batched two-stage problem. A standard NLP is the special case of one batch instance and no recourse variables. A further mechanism, the external oracle, accommodates components that cannot be expressed as parameterized expression trees. It is described in Section 7.5. 

7.4.1 Unified Formulation 

The most general formulation targeted by ExaModels.jl is a batched two-stage parametric NLP. Given B ≥ 1independent batch instances and S ≥ 0 scenarios per instance, the problem is min 

> {xb,s }
> B

X

> b=1

f0(xb, 0; θb, 0) + 

> S

X

> s=1

fs(xb, 0, x b,s ; θb,s )

!

s.t. g0(xb, 0; θb, 0) ∈ C 0, b = 1 , . . . , B, gs(xb, 0, x b,s ; θb,s ) ∈ C s, s = 1 , . . . , S, b = 1 , . . . , B, 

(5) where the scenario index s runs over 0 , 1, . . . , S and s = 0 denotes the root. The vectors xb, 0 are the root, or first-stage, variables of instance b, and xb,s for s ≥ 1 are the scenario, or second-stage, variables of that 

45 instance. The vectors θb,s are parameters, which are not optimized over. Each fs(·) and gs(·) has the SIMD structure of (3), with scenario probabilities absorbed into fs(·). Formulation (5) has two structural dimensions. The first is the scenarios, over which the root variables are shared while the scenario variables and constraints are replicated. The second is the batch instances, which share the same expression trees, and hence the same compiled functions, but differ in their numerical data. The instances couple through neither the objective nor the constraints, so minimizing the aggregated objective is equivalent to solving the B instances independently. The batched form exists so that all instances are evaluated by one set of kernels. Both dimensions are optional and can be active at the same time: B = 1 gives a two-stage stochastic program, S = 0 gives a batch of standard NLPs, and S = 0 with B = 1 recovers (3). All scenarios and batch instances share the same algebraic patterns. The SIMDFunction s, Compressor maps, and sparsity structures are therefore built once and reused across every scenario and instance. Their concrete types coincide, so the functions specialized for them are compiled only once. The only quantities that vary are numerical: parameter values, variable and constraint bounds, and the primal and dual initial points. This is what makes the extensions efficient. It is also why ExaModels.jl provides accessors that address a single scenario, modifying those arrays without touching the model structure and hence without triggering recompilation. The goal of ExaModels.jl is not to provide decomposition algorithms, which are the domain of algorithm and software developers. It is to provide what such algorithms need, namely efficient callbacks for structured models together with the structural information required to exploit them. ExaModels.jl therefore tags each variable and constraint with the stage it belongs to, and reports the scenario that each variable and constraint belongs to as well as the number of scenarios. With these, a developer can implement methods such as Benders decomposition or progressive hedging on top of the model. 

7.4.2 Two-Stage Stochastic Programs 

The two-stage structure is declared with TwoStageExaCore(nscen) together with a marker EachScenario() 

that distinguishes root from scenario declarations, as in the following example:  

> 1

S = 4 # number of scenarios  

> 2

core = TwoStageExaCore(S)  

> 34

@add_var(core, x, 2) # root (shared)  

> 5

@add_var(core, z, EachScenario(), 3) # per scenario  

> 6

@add_par(core, theta, EachScenario(), theta_vals)  

> 78

@add_obj(core, x[1]^2 + x[2]^2) # root objective  

> 9

@add_obj(core, (z[j, s] - theta[j, s])^2 for (j, s) in idx)  

> 10

@add_con(core, EachScenario(), (z[j, s] + x[2] for (j, s) in idx))  

> 11 12

model = ExaModel(core) 

where theta vals holds the per-scenario parameter values and idx collects the index pairs ( j, s ) over which the scenario patterns are evaluated. The marker also applies to @add par and @add con , and appends the scenario index as the last dimension of the declared block. Objectives are declared with the plain @add obj ,with the scenario structure carried by the data iterator. Internally, the scenario blocks are replicated S times and tagged by stage. The scenario patterns are therefore still constructed once and evaluated across all scenarios in parallel, with the scenario index acting as an additional data dimension. Two-stage models also provide counterparts of the model data accessors of Section 2.2 that address a single scenario. Parameter values, bounds, and initial points can thus be set and queried one scenario at a time, again without touching the model structure or the compiled functions. Their signatures are given in the online documentation (Shin and contributors, 2025). 

46 7.4.3 Batch Models 

The batch structure solves B independent instances that share the same expression trees, and hence the same compiled functions, but differ in parameter values. All instances are evaluated together, with each pair of a data point and an instance mapped to a separate thread. This adds a second level of parallelism on top of the parallelism across data points, and it is useful for parametric sweeps, ensemble optimization, and warm-starting. At the time of writing, this extension is under active development in the ExaModels.jl repository and is not part of a released version. It follows the scenario mechanism of Section 7.4.2: declarations are replicated across instances, the internal storage generalizes from vectors to matrices, and a flattening wrapper exposes the batch model as a standard vector-valued NLPModels.AbstractNLPModel .

## 7.5 External Oracles 

ExaModels.jl does not aim to provide efficient callbacks for every class of function. Components such as neural-network layers, PDE solvers, and custom GPU kernels are handled more efficiently by external libraries that already supply derivatives. For these cases, ExaModels.jl provides an external oracle interface. Let x be a variable block of length nx and let f (·) : Rnx → Rm be an opaque map. The call embed oracle(core, x, m; ...) adds a block z of m auxiliary output variables, registers z − f (x) = 0 as an oracle constraint, and returns the updated core, the block z, and the oracle object. The user supplies matrix-free callbacks that operate on local vectors, without global offsets: f! (function evaluation y = f (x)), jvp! (Jacobian–vector product Jf (x) v), vjp! (transposed-Jacobian–vector product Jf (x)⊤w), and an optional hvp! (Hessian–vector product ( Pmi=1 wi∇2fi(x)) v).  

> 1

core, z, _ = embed_oracle(  

> 2

core, x, N;  

> 3

f! = (y, xv) ->(y .= xv .^ 2; nothing),  

> 4

jvp! = (Jv, xv, v) ->(Jv .= 2 .* xv .* v; nothing),  

> 5

vjp! = (Jtv, xv, w)-> (Jtv .= 2 .* xv .* w; nothing),  

> 6

hvp! = (Hv, xv, w, v) ->(Hv .= 2 .* w .* v; nothing),  

> 7

) 

> 8

@add_obj(core, z[i] + sin(x[i]) for i in 1:N) 

The oracle output z is a regular Variable and can be combined with SIMD expressions in any subsequent objective or constraint. 

# 8 Numerical Experiments 

This section validates the preceding claims numerically. It measures the speedup those callbacks obtain on a GPU, and shows their evaluation time to be O(1) in the number of data points, as claimed earlier, for as long as the device is not saturated. It then exercises the callbacks inside a GPU-resident optimization solver, to quantify what that speedup is worth in a complete solve. 

## 8.1 Benchmark Problems 

We evaluate ExaModels.jl on three benchmark suites that cover a range of problem structures and scales: the Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek collection, the COPS test set, and PGLIB-OPF instances. 

Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek problems. The Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek collection (Lukˇ san and Vlˇ cek, 1999) consists of 18 scalable, sparse, equality-constrained NLPs. They were designed for testing unconstrained and equality-constrained optimization algorithms. Most are synthetic instances with no direct application context, but their partially separable structure makes them useful for benchmarking AD systems. Each problem is parameterized by the number of variables N . The objectives and constraints are sums of partially separable functions, which fits the SIMD abstraction directly. The collection includes generalized Rosenbrock, Wood, Cragg–Levy, Powell, 

47 Broyden (tridiagonal and banded), and chained variants of the Hock–Schittkowski problems (HS46–HS53), among others. Implementations for ExaModels.jl are provided in LuksanVlcekBenchmark.jl (MadSuite, 2026). 

COPS problems. The COPS test set (Dolan and Mor´ e, 2001) is a collection of 18 scalable NLPs from applications in optimal control, fluid dynamics, parameter estimation, PDE-constrained optimization, and mesh generation. The problems include, among others, the Goddard rocket, robot arm, glider trajectory, journal bearing, minimum surface, torsion, catenary chain, and several chemical engineering models (gas–oil, methanol, pinene, catalytic mixing). Each problem is parameterized by a sizing parameter, which for the PDE-based problems is a discretization resolution. The suite spans a wide range of problem structures: some problems are unconstrained, others have equality or inequality constraints, and several involve nonlinear PDEs discretized on 2D grids. Implementations for ExaModels.jl are provided in COPSBenchmark.jl (MadSuite, 2024). 

PGLIB-OPF problems. The PGLib-OPF benchmark library (Babaeinejadsarookolaee et al., 2021) provides standardized ACOPF instances ranging from 3 to 78,484 buses. These formulations, and the case data format the library distributes them in, have a lineage: MATPOWER (Zimmerman, Murillo-Sanchez, and Thomas, 2011) established the reference implementations and the case format that the field still uses, and PowerModels.jl (Coffrin et al., 2018) later expressed the polar, rectangular, and relaxed power flow formulations over that format in a common framework. We test all 66 instances in the polar (ACP) voltage formulation using ExaModelsPower.jl (Johnson et al., 2025), which provides ExaModels implementations in that tradition. Every instance has the same algebraic structure of 15 algebraic patterns. The instances differ only in the network data, that is, the bus parameters, the line admittances, the power demands, and the number of data points over which each pattern is repeated. ExaModels.jl therefore compiles the expression trees and the AD kernels once for the whole set of 66 instances. The first instance triggers compilation, and every later one reuses the compiled functions and changes only the data arrays. The pattern–data separation of Section 2.2 thus applies at the scale of a benchmark library. The OPF problems also carry inequality constraints and variable bounds, which the LV problems do not. The OPF instances are parameterized by the network topology rather than a scalar sizing parameter, making them complementary to the scalable LV and COPS problems. 

Exclusion of CUTEst. CUTEst (Gould, Orban, and Toint, 2015) is the standard test environment for mathematical optimization. We do not use it for three reasons. First, most instances in the collection are small enough that data-parallel evaluation has nothing to work with, so GPU acceleration is neither necessary nor useful for them. Second, those instances that are scalable are each parameterized by their own set of admissible dimensions rather than by a common scalable size, so the collection does not offer a size sweep of the kind our experiments require. Third, the large CUTEst instances are drawn largely from the same families as the LV and COPS suites, which we benchmark directly. 

Instance sizes. For each LV and COPS problem, we select three values of the sizing parameter targeting approximately 10 2, 10 4, and 10 6 Hessian nonzeros (nnzh), producing small , medium , and large instances. The relation between the sizing parameter and nnzh varies across problems, being linear for chain, quadratic for bearing, and cubic for polygon, so the sizes are chosen per problem to reach the target ranges. For the LV suite, we use N ∈ { 20 , 2,000 , 200 ,000 } across all 18 problems. For COPS, the sizes are problem-specific: for example, bearing uses grid sizes (5 × 5), (35 × 35), and (320 × 320), while catmix uses N ∈ { 3, 200 , 20 ,000 }.The PGLIB-OPF instances span a natural range from 3 to 78,484 buses. In total, the benchmark comprises 18 × 3 = 54 LV instances, 18 × 3 = 54 COPS instances, and 66 OPF instances, for 174 benchmark instances. 

## 8.2 Experimental Setup 

Reproducibility. The benchmark implementation, the generators that produce every table and fig-ure in this section, and the exact package environment are available at https://github.com/exanauts/ exa-models-benchmark . The batch scripts that ran each leg of the campaign are there too, in slurm/ and named by site as orcd-* and jlse-* , alongside a Makefile whose targets drive the runs, fetch the archived 

48 Table 2: Hardware platforms used in the benchmark experiments.                                             

> Platform CPU Cores RAM GPU A1 EPYC 9654 192 2266.6 GiB Instinct MI300X
> C1 Xeon Gold 5420+ 56 251.1 GiB –
> C3 EPYC 9474F 96 376.9 GiB –
> I1 Xeon CPU Max 9470C 104 1088.0 GiB Intel Data Center GPU Max 1550
> M1 M2 Pro 12 16.0 GiB M2 Pro
> N1 Xeon 6960P 144 2266.6 GiB B200
> N2 EPYC 7763 64 503.2 GiB A100-SXM4-80GB
> N3 Xeon Platinum 8580 120 2014.9 GiB H100 80GB
> N4 Xeon Platinum 8562Y+ 64 1006.9 GiB L40S
> N6 Xeon 6767P 128 2014.9 GiB RTX PRO 6000 Blackwell

results, and rebuild the paper from them. Each run is archived on the results branch of that repository as a self-contained bundle, one directory per run, holding the benchmarking script, the hardware description of the machine, the raw per-instance timings in machine-readable form, and the resolved Manifest.toml . The hardware used for benchmarking is listed in Table 2, where each platform is named by a label whose letter gives the vendor: C is CPU only, N NVIDIA, A AMD, and M Apple. The AMD and B200 systems are provided by the Joint Laboratory for System Evaluation at Argonne National Laboratory, and all other clusters are part of MIT’s Office of Research Computing and Data. The manifest fixes the software environment of that run, recording the Julia version and the resolved version of every package in the dependency graph, including the commit of ExaModels.jl used to generate the results, KernelAbstractions.jl, CUDA.jl, and the CUDA runtime and driver artifacts. The results reported here were produced with Julia 1.12 and ExaModels.jl v0.11.2 (Shin and contributors, 2025), in Float64 arithmetic unless noted. Every number reported in this section can therefore be traced to the run that produced it and to the environment in which it ran. 

Compilation. Julia compiles the model-construction code and the evaluation callbacks the first time a given model structure is encountered. That first-time cost is substantial, and it is specific to the problem, since a new set of algebraic patterns requires a new set of compiled functions. The concern of this paper is runtime performance, so every timing reported in this section is a steady-state measurement and excludes that compilation. Model creation and compilation are measured jointly in Section 8.6. This holds for the model creation times as well: they measure steady-state construction, not the first call that triggers compilation. 

Aggregate metric. We report the shifted geometric mean (SGM) with a shift of 10 μs as the aggregate performance metric. Denoting the wall times of a modeling system on problems i = 1 , . . . , n by ti, the SGM is SGM( t; σ) = exp 

 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

ln( ti + σ)



− σ, 

where the shift is σ = 10 −5 s. The SGM is less sensitive to outliers than the arithmetic mean and is standard in optimization benchmarking. Instances are classified into the Small , Medium , and Large size classes by nnz = max(nnzj , nnzh). Full per-instance timings are provided in Section B. 

GPU timing protocol. A GPU callback carries two costs that a CPU callback does not. The first is the kernel launch cost, a few microseconds per call, which a solver pays as well and which every timing we report includes. The second is host–device synchronization, paid only when the host reads a device value. A device-resident solver does not do that after each callback, since the results stay in device arrays that the following linear algebra consumes, so this cost is purely an artifact of measuring from the host rather than a property of the callback. We exclude it not by measuring and subtracting it, but by making it negligible. The timing routine of the benchmarking script is, in simplified form:  

> 1

f(); sync() # warm up  

> 2

sync() # quiesce the device  

> 3

t0 = time_ns() 

49 4 for i = 1:N # N back-to-back launches  

> 5

f()  

> 6

end  

> 7

sync() # wait for the last kernel  

> 8

(time_ns() - t0) / 1e9 / N # apparent per-call time 

The batch size N is calibrated from three synchronized single calls so that the batch spans 0 .5 s, and the reported value is the best of three batches. The apparent per-call time satisfies ˆt = N t + tsync 

N = t + tsync 

N ,

where ˆ t is the reported estimate of the average callback time, t is the true average per-call cost, tsync is the one synchronization inside the timed interval, and N is the batch size. The second term is the bias. It decreases as 1 /N and is determined by the batch duration N t rather than by the speed of the individual kernel. A 0 .5 s batch against a synchronization of order 10 μs therefore yields a relative bias of approximately 2 × 10 −5

for every callback, irrespective of its speed. The bias is positive, so the reported time overestimates the GPU callback time. 

## 8.3 NLP Function Evaluation 

We measure the NLP function evaluation performance of ExaModels.jl, on the CPU and on a range of GPU platforms. The callbacks are NLPModels.obj , NLPModels.cons! , NLPModels.grad! , NLPModels.jac coord! ,and NLPModels.hess coord! . Every timing is the minimum wall time over repeated trials, which is robust to system noise. Speedups are reported against single-threaded execution, the standard sequential baseline. The multithreaded row of each summary table shows the best thread count among 4, 8, and 16; the full ladder appears in the appendix tables, and the summary row’s choice reflects where adding threads stops helping. Each summary table reports one NVIDIA GPU, the one with the highest aggregate speedup on the large size class, together with the AMD and Intel GPUs. The composite row of each summary table aggregates the five callbacks into one evaluation cost per solve. The composite approximates the time a modeling system spends on NLP function evaluation when it is deployed inside an optimization solver. Each instance’s callback times are weighted by the call counts of a GPU-resident solve of the largest optimal power flow (OPF) instance, 115 objective, 115 constraint, 114 gradient, 114 Jacobian, and 113 Hessian evaluations, and the row reports the SGM of the weighted sum over the instances of the class. The weights are derived from that one OPF solve and reused across all three suites, so on the LV and COPS suites the row is a weighting of measured callback times, not a measurement of a solve. The full per-instance results appear in Section B, and Tables 3 to 5 summarize them as SGMs, one table per suite. ExaModels.jl compiles a derivative evaluation function specialized to the type of each expression tree, and pays that compilation cost upfront, once per model structure (Section 8.6). Section A shows the compiled gradient kernel that ExaModels.jl produces, in which almost nothing remains beyond the arithmetic the pattern requires. The GPU rows of the same summary tables run the same callbacks on the same instances under the timing protocol of Section 8.2. The GPU speedups grow with problem size across the three suites, reaching 76 × for the Hessian on the large size class of the LV suite and 30 × on the large size class of the COPS suite. On small instances the GPU is slower than the CPU, and on medium instances the two are within a factor of two. The growth of the speedup reflects GPU times that are nearly constant in the problem size rather than GPU performance that improves with size. On the LV suite, the Hessian takes 26 .9, 28 .3, and 35 .7 μs on the small, medium, and large size classes, and the Jacobian 19 .2, 19 .9, and 20 .4 μs, while the CPU times grow by more than three orders of magnitude across the same classes. 

50 Table 3: GPU speedup over single-threaded CPU: Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek (SGM, σ = 10 −5 s). 

SGM time, and speedup over single-thread ExaModels CPU (C3) 

callback backend 

Small (18)  

> nnz <10 3

Medium (18) 

> 10 3≤nnz <10 5

Large (18)  

> 10 5≤nnz

Total (54) 

obj CPU (C3) 0.1 μs ( 1.0×) 5.6 μs ( 1.0×) 371.4 μs (1 .0×) 29.1 μs (1 .0×)CPU-8T (C3) 0.2 μs (0 .4×) 6.0 μs (0 .9×) 270.9 μs (1 .4×) 25.8 μs ( 1.1×)

CUDA (N1) 41.9 μs (0 .0×) 48.0 μs (0 .1×) 52.9 μs ( 7.0×) 47.4 μs (0 .6×)AMDGPU (A1) 51.3 μs (0 .0×) 68.3 μs (0 .1×) 89.1 μs (4 .2×) 68.1 μs (0 .4×)oneAPI (I1) 114.0 μs (0 .0×) 143.4 μs (0 .0×) 273.9 μs (1 .4×) 165.5 μs (0 .2×)

cons! CPU (C3) 0.1 μs ( 1.0×) 3.1 μs ( 1.0×) 149.3 μs (1 .0×) 17.6 μs (1 .0×)CPU-8T (C3) 0.4 μs (0 .2×) 4.7 μs (0 .7×) 49.0 μs (3 .0×) 10.8 μs ( 1.6×)

CUDA (N1) 13.9 μs (0 .0×) 14.3 μs (0 .2×) 14.4 μs ( 10 ×) 14.2 μs (1 .2×)AMDGPU (A1) 28.9 μs (0 .0×) 28.6 μs (0 .1×) 28.7 μs (5 .2×) 28.7 μs (0 .6×)oneAPI (I1) 24.0 μs (0 .0×) 24.4 μs (0 .1×) 25.6 μs (5 .8×) 24.7 μs (0 .7×)

grad! CPU (C3) 0.1 μs ( 1.0×) 11.5 μs ( 1.0×) 1.05 ms (1 .0×) 51.4 μs (1 .0×)CPU-8T (C3) 0.4 μs (0 .4×) 27.8 μs (0 .4×) 1.15 ms (0 .9×) 66.9 μs (0 .8×)CUDA (N1) 20.7 μs (0 .0×) 21.8 μs (0 .5×) 22.3 μs ( 47 ×) 21.6 μs ( 2.4×)

AMDGPU (A1) 47.3 μs (0 .0×) 46.6 μs (0 .2×) 46.7 μs (23 ×) 46.9 μs (1 .1×)oneAPI (I1) 42.1 μs (0 .0×) 41.5 μs (0 .3×) 42.1 μs (25 ×) 41.9 μs (1 .2×)

jac coord! CPU (C3) 0.1 μs ( 1.0×) 7.5 μs (1 .0×) 349.4 μs (1 .0×) 29.9 μs (1 .0×)CPU-8T (C3) 0.6 μs (0 .2×) 7.5 μs ( 1.0×) 198.7 μs (1 .8×) 23.8 μs (1 .3×)CUDA (N1) 19.2 μs (0 .0×) 19.9 μs (0 .4×) 20.4 μs ( 17 ×) 19.9 μs ( 1.5×)

AMDGPU (A1) 41.6 μs (0 .0×) 40.8 μs (0 .2×) 40.9 μs (8 .5×) 41.1 μs (0 .7×)oneAPI (I1) 44.8 μs (0 .0×) 46.5 μs (0 .2×) 50.5 μs (6 .9×) 47.2 μs (0 .6×)

hess coord! CPU (C3) 0.4 μs ( 1.0×) 29.9 μs (1 .0×) 2.73 ms (1 .0×) 94.3 μs (1 .0×)CPU-8T (C3) 1.0 μs (0 .4×) 25.3 μs ( 1.2×) 689.7 μs (4 .0×) 54.8 μs (1 .7×)CUDA (N1) 26.9 μs (0 .0×) 28.3 μs (1 .1×) 35.7 μs ( 76 ×) 30.1 μs ( 3.1×)

AMDGPU (A1) 57.1 μs (0 .0×) 56.4 μs (0 .5×) 61.2 μs (45 ×) 58.2 μs (1 .6×)oneAPI (I1) 71.8 μs (0 .0×) 73.8 μs (0 .4×) 99.5 μs (27 ×) 80.9 μs (1 .2×)composite CPU (C3) 79.8 μs ( 1.0×) 5.96 ms ( 1.0×) 615.17 ms (1 .0×) 6.9 ms ( 1.0×)

CPU-8T (C3) 277.0 μs (0 .3×) 8.06 ms (0 .7×) 293.5 ms (2 .1×) 8.78 ms (0 .8×)CUDA (N1) 14.18 ms (0 .0×) 15.35 ms (0 .4×) 16.86 ms ( 36 ×) 15.42 ms (0 .4×)AMDGPU (A1) 26.26 ms (0 .0×) 27.98 ms (0 .2×) 31.16 ms (20 ×) 28.4 ms (0 .2×)oneAPI (I1) 34.7 ms (0 .0×) 38.66 ms (0 .2×) 57.71 ms (11 ×) 42.62 ms (0 .2×)

The absolute level of the GPU times, a few tens of microseconds, is set by the kernel launch overhead. The flatness across four orders of magnitude in problem size is the constant-time parallel evaluation argued in Section 1, realized in practice for as long as the device is not saturated. The spread across devices is modest. On the large-instance LV Hessian, the five NVIDIA cards measured span 34 .8–76 .4×, the AMD Instinct MI300X reaches 44 .5×, the Intel Intel Data Center GPU Max 1550 reaches 27 .4×, and the Apple M2 Pro reaches 23 .3×. The COPS suite shows the same modest spread. The same kernels run across four vendors without change. The Apple timings, in the per-instance figures and the appendix tables, are in Float32 , while all other series are in Float64 .The LV problems show larger GPU speedups than the COPS problems. The absolute Hessian times show the same thing, 92 .9 μs on large COPS instances against 35 .7 μs on large LV instances. On the PGLIB-OPF instances the acceleration is more moderate still, reaching 7 .3× for the Hessian on the large size class, and the objective and gradient callbacks show no speedup there. The LV expression trees are simpler and more uniform, which gives a higher arithmetic intensity per data point. The COPS problems have more expression structures, as in the rocket dynamics with its exponentials and divisions, and this raises register pressure and lowers GPU occupancy. The OPF objective is a simple sum over generators and offers little parallelism, which is why the objective and gradient callbacks do not accelerate there. The multi-threaded CPU rows use the KernelAbstractions.jl CPU() backend, so they run the same data-parallel kernels as the GPU rows, one thread per data point, on host threads (Section 6.3). On the large instances of the LV and COPS suites they stay an order of magnitude below the GPU on the same callbacks. 

51 Table 4: GPU speedup over single-threaded CPU: COPS (SGM, σ = 10 −5 s). 

SGM time, and speedup over single-thread ExaModels CPU (C3) 

callback backend 

Small (16)  

> nnz <10 3

Medium (18) 

> 10 3≤nnz <10 5

Large (20)  

> 10 5≤nnz

Total (54) 

obj CPU (C3) 0.5 μs ( 1.0×) 3.5 μs ( 1.0×) 19.9 μs (1 .0×) 6.8 μs ( 1.0×)

CPU-8T (C3) 0.7 μs (0 .7×) 5.6 μs (0 .6×) 18.9 μs ( 1.1×) 7.5 μs (0 .9×)CUDA (N1) 44.5 μs (0 .0×) 47.2 μs (0 .1×) 48.1 μs (0 .4×) 46.7 μs (0 .1×)AMDGPU (A1) 56.4 μs (0 .0×) 60.6 μs (0 .1×) 65.5 μs (0 .3×) 61.0 μs (0 .1×)oneAPI (I1) 129.4 μs (0 .0×) 157.8 μs (0 .0×) 1.03 ms (0 .0×) 303.4 μs (0 .0×)

cons! CPU (C3) 0.4 μs ( 1.0×) 13.8 μs ( 1.0×) 614.5 μs (1 .0×) 52.5 μs (1 .0×)CPU-8T (C3) 3.3 μs (0 .1×) 20.1 μs (0 .7×) 179.9 μs (3 .4×) 36.7 μs ( 1.4×)

CUDA (N1) 43.8 μs (0 .0×) 52.2 μs (0 .3×) 65.2 μs ( 9.4×) 53.9 μs (1 .0×)AMDGPU (A1) 84.6 μs (0 .0×) 97.8 μs (0 .1×) 109.3 μs (5 .6×) 97.7 μs (0 .5×)oneAPI (I1) 86.2 μs (0 .0×) 103.2 μs (0 .1×) 113.4 μs (5 .4×) 101.4 μs (0 .5×)

grad! CPU (C3) 1.0 μs ( 1.0×) 5.7 μs ( 1.0×) 60.0 μs (1 .0×) 14.6 μs ( 1.0×)

CPU-8T (C3) 1.1 μs (0 .9×) 8.4 μs (0 .7×) 70.5 μs (0 .9×) 17.4 μs (0 .8×)CUDA (N1) 23.0 μs (0 .0×) 22.8 μs (0 .2×) 24.8 μs ( 2.4×) 23.6 μs (0 .6×)AMDGPU (A1) 52.3 μs (0 .0×) 47.3 μs (0 .1×) 49.0 μs (1 .2×) 49.4 μs (0 .3×)oneAPI (I1) 51.6 μs (0 .0×) 47.2 μs (0 .1×) 47.8 μs (1 .3×) 48.7 μs (0 .3×)

jac coord! CPU (C3) 0.5 μs ( 1.0×) 21.2 μs ( 1.0×) 937.4 μs (1 .0×) 69.9 μs (1 .0×)CPU-8T (C3) 3.2 μs (0 .1×) 23.5 μs (0 .9×) 359.8 μs (2 .6×) 51.9 μs ( 1.3×)

CUDA (N1) 52.7 μs (0 .0×) 57.0 μs (0 .4×) 70.6 μs ( 13 ×) 60.4 μs (1 .2×)AMDGPU (A1) 101.6 μs (0 .0×) 103.4 μs (0 .2×) 122.0 μs (7 .7×) 109.4 μs (0 .6×)oneAPI (I1) 155.9 μs (0 .0×) 164.2 μs (0 .1×) 182.0 μs (5 .2×) 168.1 μs (0 .4×)

hess coord! CPU (C3) 1.9 μs ( 1.0×) 50.2 μs ( 1.0×) 2.83 ms (1 .0×) 145.2 μs (1 .0×)CPU-8T (C3) 4.9 μs (0 .4×) 52.8 μs (0 .9×) 754.3 μs (3 .7×) 93.5 μs (1 .6×)CUDA (N1) 71.9 μs (0 .0×) 75.6 μs (0 .7×) 92.9 μs ( 30 ×) 80.4 μs ( 1.8×)

AMDGPU (A1) 140.5 μs (0 .0×) 140.6 μs (0 .4×) 172.0 μs (16 ×) 151.5 μs (1 .0×)oneAPI (I1) 211.5 μs (0 .0×) 224.8 μs (0 .2×) 229.3 μs (12 ×) 222.4 μs (0 .7×)composite CPU (C3) 287.9 μs ( 1.0×) 10.72 ms ( 1.0×) 816.87 ms (1 .0×) 18.45 ms ( 1.0×)

CPU-8T (C3) 1.1 ms (0 .3×) 14.44 ms (0 .7×) 252.04 ms (3 .2×) 19.48 ms (0 .9×)CUDA (N1) 28.06 ms (0 .0×) 30.78 ms (0 .3×) 38.1 ms ( 21 ×) 32.41 ms (0 .6×)AMDGPU (A1) 52.03 ms (0 .0×) 54.72 ms (0 .2×) 67.64 ms (12 ×) 58.31 ms (0 .3×)oneAPI (I1) 77.92 ms (0 .0×) 88.97 ms (0 .1×) 249.29 ms (3 .3×) 125.61 ms (0 .1×)

Figures 7 to 9 show the same comparison per instance. The crossover at which the GPU overtakes the CPU is visible in each suite, and the curves flatten to the right, where the GPU time has stopped growing with the problem. 

## 8.4 Per-Instance GPU Scaling 

The class-level summaries above aggregate over instances; this subsection follows single instances as they grow, on the CPU and CUDA backends of platform N6. The first ladder is the Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek Rosenbrock problem at N = 20, 2 ,000, and 200 ,000; the second is the ACOPF polar formulation at case118 ieee ,

case1354 pegase , and case78484 epigrids .The ExaModels.jl GPU Hessian takes 16.2 μs, 55.9 μs, and 119.3 μs over the Rosenbrock ladder, and the Jacobian takes 9.6 μs, 20.8 μs, and 41.6 μs. The times grow with N , while the problem grows by four orders of magnitude. The growth shows the saturation boundary of the constant-time argument of Section 8.3: this lad-der runs on the RTX PRO 6000 Blackwell of platform N6, whose reported FP64 peak is 1 .9 TFLOPS (NVIDIA Corporation, 2025), against 40 TFLOPS for the B200 of the summary tables (NVIDIA Corporation, 2024), where the Hessian stays within 26.9–35.7 μs across the size classes. The launch cost makes the CPU the faster device at N = 20, and the objective callback, a single scalar reduction, gains little from the GPU at any size. A callback issues one kernel per algebraic pattern it touches, and one more to zero its output buffer. The polar formulation has one objective pattern and fourteen constraint patterns. The Hessian touches all fifteen patterns, so NLPModels.hess coord! issues sixteen kernels. The objective does not enter the Jacobian, 

52 Table 5: GPU speedup over single-threaded CPU: PGLIB-OPF (polar) (SGM, σ = 10 −5 s). 

SGM time, and speedup over single-thread ExaModels CPU (C3) 

callback backend 

Small (3)  

> nnz <10 3

Medium (19) 

> 10 3≤nnz <10 5

Large (44)  

> 10 5≤nnz

Total (66) 

obj CPU (C3) 0.0 μs ( 1.0×) 0.0 μs ( 1.0×) 0.0 μs ( 1.0×) 0.0 μs ( 1.0×)

CPU-4T (C3) 0.2 μs (0 .1×) 0.3 μs (0 .1×) 2.3 μs (0 .0×) 1.6 μs (0 .0×)CUDA (N1) 40.6 μs (0 .0×) 43.3 μs (0 .0×) 46.4 μs (0 .0×) 45.2 μs (0 .0×)AMDGPU (A1) 50.2 μs (0 .0×) 52.0 μs (0 .0×) 66.2 μs (0 .0×) 61.1 μs (0 .0×)oneAPI (I1) 360.6 μs (0 .0×) 365.3 μs (0 .0×) 464.5 μs (0 .0×) 428.6 μs (0 .0×)

cons! CPU (C3) 0.5 μs ( 1.0×) 12.3 μs ( 1.0×) 378.2 μs (1 .0×) 134.8 μs ( 1.0×)

CPU-4T (C3) 41.7 μs (0 .0×) 62.7 μs (0 .2×) 360.4 μs (1 .0×) 202.0 μs (0 .7×)CUDA (N1) 185.9 μs (0 .0×) 199.2 μs (0 .1×) 203.2 μs ( 1.9×) 201.2 μs (0 .7×)AMDGPU (A1) 293.8 μs (0 .0×) 284.2 μs (0 .0×) 280.1 μs (1 .4×) 281.9 μs (0 .5×)oneAPI (I1) 321.3 μs (0 .0×) 454.0 μs (0 .0×) 434.9 μs (0 .9×) 434.3 μs (0 .3×)

grad! CPU (C3) 0.0 μs ( 1.0×) 0.2 μs ( 1.0×) 4.7 μs ( 1.0×) 3.0 μs ( 1.0×)

CPU-4T (C3) 0.2 μs (0 .1×) 0.6 μs (0 .4×) 7.5 μs (0 .6×) 4.8 μs (0 .6×)CUDA (N1) 19.9 μs (0 .0×) 20.9 μs (0 .0×) 21.9 μs (0 .2×) 21.5 μs (0 .1×)AMDGPU (A1) 45.8 μs (0 .0×) 45.5 μs (0 .0×) 45.4 μs (0 .1×) 45.4 μs (0 .1×)oneAPI (I1) 32.2 μs (0 .0×) 40.1 μs (0 .0×) 39.6 μs (0 .1×) 39.4 μs (0 .1×)

jac coord! CPU (C3) 1.0 μs ( 1.0×) 24.6 μs ( 1.0×) 792.5 μs (1 .0×) 257.1 μs (1 .0×)CPU-4T (C3) 22.8 μs (0 .0×) 46.7 μs (0 .5×) 475.2 μs (1 .7×) 221.4 μs (1 .2×)CUDA (N1) 138.0 μs (0 .0×) 155.5 μs (0 .2×) 158.9 μs ( 5.0×) 156.9 μs ( 1.6×)

AMDGPU (A1) 253.4 μs (0 .0×) 243.5 μs (0 .1×) 241.5 μs (3 .3×) 242.6 μs (1 .1×)oneAPI (I1) 360.2 μs (0 .0×) 559.1 μs (0 .0×) 529.9 μs (1 .5×) 528.8 μs (0 .5×)

hess coord! CPU (C3) 1.5 μs ( 1.0×) 37.3 μs ( 1.0×) 1.25 ms (1 .0×) 385.6 μs (1 .0×)CPU-4T (C3) 23.9 μs (0 .1×) 63.1 μs (0 .6×) 631.6 μs (2 .0×) 290.4 μs (1 .3×)CUDA (N1) 153.4 μs (0 .0×) 168.0 μs (0 .2×) 172.3 μs ( 7.3×) 170.1 μs ( 2.3×)

AMDGPU (A1) 267.3 μs (0 .0×) 262.1 μs (0 .1×) 260.7 μs (4 .8×) 261.4 μs (1 .5×)oneAPI (I1) 399.2 μs (0 .0×) 613.3 μs (0 .1×) 585.1 μs (2 .1×) 582.9 μs (0 .7×)composite CPU (C3) 272.7 μs ( 1.0×) 7.08 ms ( 1.0×) 274.29 ms (1 .0×) 70.05 ms (1 .0×)CPU-4T (C3) 10.15 ms (0 .0×) 19.48 ms (0 .4×) 167.95 ms (1 .6×) 79.52 ms (0 .9×)CUDA (N1) 61.48 ms (0 .0×) 67.18 ms (0 .1×) 68.81 ms ( 4.0×) 67.99 ms ( 1.0×)

AMDGPU (A1) 103.89 ms (0 .0×) 101.24 ms (0 .1×) 102.03 ms (2 .7×) 101.88 ms (0 .7×)oneAPI (I1) 219.23 ms (0 .0×) 285.82 ms (0 .0×) 293.25 ms (0 .9×) 287.26 ms (0 .2×)

so NLPModels.jac coord! issues fifteen. These counts are read from the model and are exact. Dividing each measured GPU time by its kernel count gives a per-kernel cost. For the Hessian it is 11.0 μs, 10.8 μs, and 21.9 μs at the three ACOPF cases. For the Jacobian it is 10.0 μs, 10.6 μs, and 11.0 μs. The Jacobian per-kernel cost varies by at most 10% across those three cases, while the network grows by a factor of 665 in bus count. The Hessian per-kernel cost is flat between the two smaller cases and roughly doubles at the largest. The kernel count therefore accounts for the Jacobian cost across this range, and does not account for the Hessian cost at the largest case. That the fixed part is the kernel launch is an inference, supported by its magnitude and by the Jacobian, the cheaper kernel, coming out below the Hessian at every size. The floor is a property of the granularity of the abstraction, one kernel per pattern, and fusing the patterns of a model into a single generated kernel, or issuing them on concurrent streams, would lower it. The following section shows, however, that lowering it further carries little practical benefit, since NLP function evaluation is already a small share of a complete solve. 

## 8.5 Measuring the Benefits of GPU-Resident Callbacks 

Sections 8.3 and 8.4 measure callbacks in isolation. What a user experiences is a solve, in which the callbacks are one term among several. Speeding up the callbacks can therefore save only the share of the solve that the callbacks occupy. We run one interior-point method on two sets of instances and move only the device on which each of its two dominant costs is paid. 

53 ExaModels (CPU, C3) ExaModels (CPU-4T, C3) ExaModels (AMDGPU, A1) ExaModels (CUDA, N1) ExaModels (Metal, M1 *) ExaModels (oneAPI, I1) 10 −4

10 −1

10 2

> obj

10 −3

10 0

10 3

> cons

10 −2

10 0

10 2

> grad

10 −3

10 0

10 3

> jac

10 −3

10 0

10 3

> hess
> chained-hs51-20 chained-hs52-20 chained-hs53-20 chained-powell-20 trigo-tridiagonal-20 chained-hs49-20 chained-hs50-20 chained-hs47-20 modified-brown-20 chained-hs48-20 generalized-brown-20 chained-hs46-20 wood-20 augmented-lagrangian-20 cragg-levy-20 ros-20 broyden-tridiagonal-20 broyden-banded-20 modified brown-2k trigo tridiagonal-2k chained powell-2k chained hs51-2k chained hs52-2k chained hs53-2k chained hs49-2k chained hs50-2k chained hs48-2k chained hs47-2k generalized brown-2k chained hs46-2k augmented lagrangian-2k wood-2k cragg levy-2k ros-2k broyden tridiagonal-2k broyden banded-2k modified brown-200k trigo tridiagonal-200k chained powell-200k chained hs51-200k chained hs52-200k chained hs53-200k chained hs49-200k chained hs50-200k chained hs48-200k chained hs47-200k generalized brown-200k chained hs46-200k augmented lagrangian-200k wood-200k cragg levy-200k ros-200k broyden tridiagonal-200k broyden banded-200k

10 −2

10 0

10 2

Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek instance (sorted by nnz J + nnz H )

> composite

Figure 7: Per-callback and composite speedup over single-threaded CPU (C3) on Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek instances, sorted by nnz J + nnz H . *Float32 precision. 

8.5.1 Solver Configurations and Reported Quantities 

Two of the four configurations pair a model on one device with a solver on the other. A user reaches for such a configuration when only one half of the solution procedure has been ported, and its cost is what the experiment is meant to expose. The bridge is WrapperNLPModel , provided by ExaModels.jl, which presents a model living on one device to a solver living on the other and forwards every callback through intermediate copy buffers. The solver is MadNLP.jl (Shin, Pacaud, and Montoison, 2025) with the LiftedKKT formulation (Pacaud, Shin, et al., 2024), which relaxes the equality constraints and condenses the KKT system so that the resulting matrix admits a sparse Cholesky-like factorization on a GPU. MadNLP.jl itself runs on either device, and the 

54 ExaModels (CPU, C3) ExaModels (CPU-4T, C3) ExaModels (AMDGPU, A1) ExaModels (CUDA, N1) ExaModels (Metal, M1 *) ExaModels (oneAPI, I1) 10 −5

> 10 0
> obj
> 10 −4
> 10 −1
> 10 2
> cons
> 10 −3
> 10 0
> 10 3
> grad
> 10 −4
> 10 −1
> 10 2
> jac
> 10 −2
> 10 0
> 10 2
> hess
> roc-2 poly-10 cam-20 rob-2 steer-5 elec-5 chain-50 glid-2 bear-5x5 tor-5x5 mix-3 surf-5x5 mar-2 gas-2 pin-2 meth-2 channel-5 glid-80 bear-35x35 tor-35x35 surf-30x30 rob-150 roc-200 steer-400 poly-100 meth-50 cam-2000 elec-50 chain-5000 mix-200 mar-150 pin-100 gas-200 channel-400 dir-5 elec-200 dir-20 bear-320x320 poly-800 tor-320x320 surf-280x280 glid-8000 roc-17000 rob-15000 meth-4000 steer-42000 cam-170000 dir-100 mar-14000 chain-500000 mix-20000 pin-10000 gas-18000 channel-42000 10 −2
> 10 0
> 10 2

COPS instance (sorted by nnz J + nnz H )

> composite

Figure 8: Per-callback and composite speedup over single-threaded CPU (C3) on COPS instances, sorted by nnz J + nnz H . *Float32 precision. linear solver is chosen to match: LDLFactorizations.jl runs only on the CPU, and NVIDIA cuDSS only on the GPU. Each configuration is named by the device of the NLP solver and the device of the model. The four configurations are as close to one another as two devices allow. Each solves the same problem with the same formulation at the same tolerance, and each factorizes the same condensed KKT system with a limited-pivoting LDL factorization. LDLFactorizations.jl is chosen as the CPU linear solver because it has limited pivoting, similar to cuDSS, because it is purely single-threaded, and because it performs an LDL rather than an LBL factorization. The CPU and GPU configurations therefore run essentially the same algorithm, and the comparison isolates where the solver and the model run rather than which algorithm runs. A better CPU alternative exists, solving the augmented system with an LBL factorization with pivoting, but the algorithms are deliberately synchronized so that the experiment measures the effect of running the NLP solver and the NLP functions on the CPU against the GPU. The augmented route is preferred on the CPU because pivoting handles the indefinite KKT system stably without the conditioning penalty that condensation introduces; condensation is the price of a pivoting-free factorization, which the GPU requires. The Julia code that runs is nearly identical across the configurations. What differs is the array types it 

55 ExaModels (CPU, C3) ExaModels (CPU-4T, C3) ExaModels (AMDGPU, A1) ExaModels (CUDA, N1) ExaModels (Metal, M1 *) ExaModels (oneAPI, I1) 10 −6

> 10 −3
> 10 0
> obj
> 10 −3
> 10 −1
> 10 1
> cons
> 10 −2
> 10 0
> grad
> 10 −2
> 10 0
> 10 2
> jac
> 10 −3
> 10 −1
> 10 1
> hess
> 3l 5p 14 24i 30 30a 39e 57 60c 73i 118 89p 200a 179g 162i 197s 300 240p 588s 500g 793g 1354p 1888r 1951r 1803s 2383w 2312g 2737so 2736s 2746w 2746wo 3012w 2000g 3120s 2848r 2868r 2853s 3022g 3375w 2869p 2742g 4661s 3970g 4917g 4020g 4601g 4837g 4619g 6468r 6470r 5658e 6495r 6515r 7336e 10k 8387p 9591g 9241p 10k 10k 14k 21k 19k 30k 24k 78k 10 −3
> 10 −1
> 10 1

PGLIB-OPF instance (sorted by nnz J + nnz H )

> composite

Figure 9: Per-callback and composite speedup over single-threaded CPU (C3) on PGLIB-OPF (polar formulation) instances, sorted by nnz J + nnz H . *Float32 precision. is dispatched on, and hence the low-level kernels those dispatches select, e.g., BLAS operations, map and map-reduce operations, and the NLP function evaluation kernels. The comparison is therefore between the same software on different hardware, together with the bridge between the two. Table 6 and Figure 10 separate the NLP function evaluation out of the solve, wherever that quantity can be measured without disturbing it. The evaluation column of Table 6 is the NLP function evaluation time contained in the solution time. In the fully GPU-resident configuration a callback only launches its kernels and nothing forces it to complete, so its evaluation time cannot be measured without altering the solve, and that entry is left blank. All four configurations were measured on platform N6, so the rows differ only in where the model and the NLP solver run. Iteration counts are reported alongside the times because they are not identical across configurations. The CPU and the GPU evaluate the same expressions in different orders and therefore round differently, so the iterate sequences diverge slightly. 

8.5.2 Solve Time and Evaluation Share 

Table 6 reports the largest instance of each problem. When the NLP solver runs on the CPU, the factorization dominates the solution time, and the device on which the model is evaluated has little effect: making the model 

56 Table 6: Solution time for one interior-point solve, across the four configurations of Section 8.5.                                                

> Solver Model solution (s) evaluation (s) total (s) it.
> Rosenbrock ( N= 200 ,000 )
> LDLFactorizations (CPU) CPU 0.889 0.154 0.903 7LDLFactorizations (CPU) GPU 0.732 0.051 0.763 7cuDSS (GPU) CPU 0.496 0.174 0.523 7cuDSS (GPU) GPU 0.293 –0.308 7
> PGLIB-OPF case78484 epigrids
> LDLFactorizations (CPU) CPU 147 9.91 147 113 LDLFactorizations (CPU) GPU 142 3.52 142 114 cuDSS (GPU) CPU 15.2 7.90 15.4 114 cuDSS (GPU) GPU 7.37 –7.48 113
> C/C C/G G/C G/G 0123
> ×10 −2
> wall time (s)

N = 20  

> C/C C/G G/C G/G 024
> ×10 −2

N = 2 ,000 

> C/C C/G G/C G/G 00.20.40.60.8

N = 200 ,000 

> C/C C/G G/C G/G 00.20.4
> wall time (s)

1,354 buses 

> C/C C/G G/C G/G 0246

9,241 buses 

> C/C C/G G/C G/G 050 100 150

78,478 buses 

NLP function evaluation rest of solve evaluation and solve model creation 

Figure 10: Breakdown of the solution time across the four configurations of Table 6: Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek Rosenbrock on the top row and PGLIB-OPF on the bottom, at three instances each. GPU-resident changes the case78484 epigrids solution time by a factor of 1.04. Moving the NLP solver to the GPU reduces the solution time from 147 s to 15.4 s, a factor of 9.6. Making the model GPU-resident reduces the solution time further, from 15.4 s to 7.48 s, a factor of 2.1. The overall reduction against the all-CPU configuration is a factor of 19.7. On the Rosenbrock instance, the two contributions are comparable: moving the NLP solver to the GPU gains a factor of 1.7, and making the model GPU-resident gains a factor of 1.7. The evaluation share of the solve behaves differently on the two devices. Figure 10 shows the breakdown across instance sizes, and the largest instances show the contrast most clearly. Each bar group is labeled by the device of the NLP solver over the device of the model evaluation, and each panel carries its own linear axis. The fully GPU-resident configuration ( G/G ) is drawn as a single segment, since its evaluation share is the quantity that cannot be measured without altering the solve. With the solver on the CPU, evaluation is a small part of the solve, 7% of the all-CPU configuration at case78484 epigrids . The factorization dominates so completely there that accelerating the callbacks could not repay the transfers and synchronization it would cost. Moving the solver to the GPU removes that dominance and leaves evaluation as the exposed term. 

57 Table 7: Julia compilation time for ExaModels.jl, varying the problem size and the number of distinct constraint kernels. Both sweeps ran on platform N6.                                            

> CPU GPU varying value model total model total
> Julia compilation, ExaModels.jl: problem size n
> 1000 318 4.7 s 16.2 s 67.0 s 10000 339 5.0 s 16.1 s 66.7 s 100000 324 4.8 s 16.3 s 66.9 s 1000000 371 5.0 s 16.1 s 66.2 s
> Julia compilation, ExaModels.jl: constraint kernels
> 1357 5.0 s 15.9 s 66.7 s 2504 5.2 s 16.2 s 67.7 s 4809 5.5 s 16.9 s 71.7 s 81.5 s 6.4 s 17.4 s 74.6 s 16 2.8 s 8.0 s 19.2 s 80.9 s

With the model still on the host, evaluation accounts for 52% of the same solve, and every callback pays for a transfer across the bus and for the completion barrier the transfer implies. Making the model GPU-resident removes both at once, which is why that configuration is the one where GPU acceleration of the callbacks actually pays. The configuration pairing a GPU-resident model with a solver on the CPU is the one that does not pay. The callbacks themselves do become faster, which the evaluation column of Table 6 shows. The solve does not follow, because the function evaluation is a small share of the total with a CPU solver, so cutting it changes the total by little. The achievable improvement is further limited by the bridge: each iteration must synchronize and transfer data between the host and the device, as every callback copies its arguments to the device and its results back. The practical reading is that the benefit of GPU-resident callbacks depends on the rest of the solution procedure already being on the device, and that porting the modeling layer alone is not a shortcut to it. 

## 8.6 Model Compilation Time 

The preceding subsections measure warm evaluation; this subsection measures the compilation cost paid before it. ExaModels.jl compiles specialized code separately for model creation and for each of the five NLP function callbacks of Section 8.2, one set of kernels per algebraic pattern. The reported time covers all of it: the model creation and the compilation of every kernel, not of a single one. Table 7 reports Julia’s own accounting of that time on the CPU and CUDA backends, during model construction and additionally through the first derivative evaluation and solve, varying the problem size at a fixed set of constraint kernels and the number of distinct constraint kernels at a fixed size. The constraint kernels are sixteen synthetic algebraic patterns over consecutive variable pairs, such as x2 

> i

+ xi+1 , sin( xi) xi+1 , exi−xi+1 , px2 

> i

+ 1 + xi+1 ,and tanh( xi) − xi+1 , each a distinct expression compiled as its own pattern. The kernel-count sweep splits the same total constraint count among the first k patterns, so the problem size stays fixed while only the number of distinct patterns varies. In the table, model is the compilation during model construction, total 

additionally includes the first derivative evaluation and the solve, and times are in milliseconds unless a unit is shown. On both backends the compilation time is flat in the problem size, within 0.9% on the GPU across a factor of 1 ,000, and grows with the number of distinct constraint kernels, by 7 .9× on the CPU and 1 .21 × on the GPU from 1 kernel to 16. The GPU increment is proportionally smaller because the measured time on the GPU includes compilation beyond the ExaModels.jl kernels, in CUDA.jl and its supporting compilation stack. That fixed cost, about 16 s, dominates the per-kernel cost, so the growth is masked; the per-kernel growth is present on both backends. Compilation is paid per algebraic pattern rather than per data point, so a model with few patterns compiles in seconds however large its data, and the cost scales only when the model gains structurally new constraints. 

58 The cost is also paid once per pattern set: recreating the same model, or creating it at a different size, triggers no further compilation. An ACOPF model compiled on a three-bus network can be recreated for the 78,484-bus network at no additional compilation cost, since every instance of the formulation shares the same algebraic patterns (Section 8.1). 

# 9 Conclusions 

We have presented ExaModels.jl, an AMS that exploits the partially separable, repetitive structure of large-scale NLPs to provide scalable NLP function evaluation and GPU acceleration. Two ideas underpin the system. The first is a SIMD abstraction that represents an NLP as a small number of algebraic patterns, each evaluated over many data points. It is realized through a parameterized expression tree that is fully encoded in the Julia type system. Because the problem structure is recognized at compile time, NLP function evaluation reduces to embarrassingly parallel loops over data points, so the same code runs natively on GPUs. The second is a coloring-free sparse AD algorithm . It performs the sparsity analysis on the parameterized expression tree itself, and assembles the Jacobian and Hessian directly into a partially compressed COO format. The parameterized expression tree is what makes the GPU acceleration possible. Each algebraic pattern compiles to a single kernel, so every NLP function callback becomes a data-parallel loop over the data points, with no device code in the model. Data-parallel execution on GPUs yields up to 76 × over single-threaded CPU evaluation, on the largest Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek instances. NLP function evaluation also takes constant time. Once the device supplies enough threads, the cost is set by the number of algebraic patterns and not by the number of data points, so it does not grow as the problem grows. This is the O(1) behavior the SIMD abstraction was designed to deliver, and Section 8.3 demonstrates it. For the class of problems considered here, NLP function evaluation on a GPU is therefore effectively instantaneous, and what remains is the runtime efficiency of the optimization solver itself. The implications of this work are as follows. 

• For modelers and modeling library developers. GPU compatibility is the benefit worth pursuing, and either templatization or vectorization delivers it. A model that runs on the device makes a fully device-resident framework possible, and that is where the large computational gains are. The remaining differences are largely a matter of preference. Templatization keeps the constraint and objective syntax that mathematical programming languages have long used, and it can avoid the overhead of graph coloring. Vectorization integrates seamlessly with the surrounding machine learning workflows. 

• For solver developers. For classical applications, the major effort now belongs in reducing the number of factorizations the algorithm requires. Function evaluation is negligible beside them, especially on a GPU, since its cost does not grow with the number of data points. A solver can therefore assume in-place device-resident callbacks, exactly as it already assumes them on the CPU, and spend its effort on the linear algebra and on matching the reliability of CPU solvers. Progress there, in either reliability or efficiency, will make the results of this work more useful in practice. 

# Acknowledgments 

ExaModels.jl is built on the broader Julia ecosystem, and we are indebted to several communities within it. The cross-platform GPU portability described in Section 6 rests entirely on the JuliaGPU stack. We thank Valentin Churavy and the developers of KernelAbstractions.jl for the backend-agnostic kernel layer. We also thank Tim Besard and the wider JuliaGPU community for CUDA.jl, AMDGPU.jl, oneAPI.jl, Metal.jl, and the GPUCompiler.jl infrastructure, which lets a single ExaModels.jl codebase run unmodified on NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, and Apple hardware. The AOT compilation capability of Section 7.3.1 relies on Julia’s static compilation and trimming effort. We thank the developers of juliac and the Julia compiler team for making it possible to package complete optimization applications as standalone binaries. ExaModels.jl also connects 

59 to a broad solver ecosystem through the NLPModels.jl callback interface. We thank Dominique Orban and the JuliaSmoothOptimizers community for NLPModels.jl and the surrounding optimization tooling. We thank the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility for providing access to the Joint Laboratory for System Evaluation, on which some of the benchmark experiments in Section 8 were performed. We thank MIT’s Office of Research Computing and Data for the computing resources on which the remaining benchmark experiments were performed. This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science (SC), Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR), Competitive Portfolios Project on Energy Efficient Computing: A Holistic Methodology, under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. 

# References 

Amos, Brandon and J. Zico Kolter (July 2017). “OptNet: Differentiable Optimization as a Layer in Neural Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning .Ed. by Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh. Vol. 70. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, pp. 136–145. url : https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/amos17a.html (visited on 07/16/2024). Andersson, Joel A. E., Joris Gillis, Greg Horn, James B. Rawlings, and Moritz Diehl (Mar. 2019). “CasADi: A Software Framework for Nonlinear Optimization and Optimal Control”. In: Mathe-matical Programming Computation 11.1, pp. 1–36. doi : 10.1007/s12532-018-0139-4 . (Visited on 11/30/2023). Babaeinejadsarookolaee, Sogol, Adam Birchfield, Richard D. Christie, Carleton Coffrin, Christopher DeMarco, Ruisheng Diao, Michael Ferris, Stephane Fliscounakis, Scott Greene, Renke Huang, Cedric Josz, Roman Korab, Bernard Lesieutre, Jean Maeght, Terrence W. K. Mak, Daniel K. Molzahn, Thomas J. Overbye, Patrick Panciatici, Byungkwon Park, Jonathan Snodgrass, Ahmad Tbaileh, Pascal Van Hentenryck, and Ray Zimmerman (Jan. 2021). The Power Grid Library for Benchmarking AC Optimal Power Flow Algorithms . doi : 10.48550/arXiv.1908.02788 . arXiv: 

1908.02788 [math] . (Visited on 03/11/2025). Baydin, Atılım G¨ une¸ s, Barak A. Pearlmutter, Alexey Andreyevich Radul, and Jeffrey Mark Siskind (2018). “Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: A Survey”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 18.153, pp. 1–43. url : https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v18/17-468.html .Betts, John T. (Jan. 2010). Practical Methods for Optimal Control and Estimation Using Non-linear Programming . Second. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. doi : 10.1137/1. 9780898718577 . (Visited on 07/19/2025). Bezanson, Jeff, Alan Edelman, Stefan Karpinski, and Viral B. Shah (Jan. 2017). “Julia: A Fresh Approach to Numerical Computing”. In: SIAM Review 59.1, pp. 65–98. doi : 10.1137/141000671 .(Visited on 05/17/2024). Biegler, Lorenz T. (2010). Nonlinear Programming: Concepts, Algorithms, and Applications to Chemical Processes . MOS-SIAM Series on Optimization 10. Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. doi : 10.1137/1.9780898719383 .Biegler, Lorenz T., Matthias Heinkenschloss, Omar Ghattas, Bart Van Bloemen Waanders, Timothy J. Barth, Michael Griebel, David E. Keyes, Risto M. Nieminen, Dirk Roose, and Tamar Schlick, eds. (2003). Large-Scale PDE-Constrained Optimization . Vol. 30. Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-55508-4 . (Visited on 05/23/2024). Birge, John R. and Fran¸ cois Louveaux (1997). Introduction to Stochastic Programming . Springer Series in Operations Research and Financial Engineering. New York: Springer-Verlag. doi :

10.1007/b97617 . (Visited on 02/02/2025). 60 Bradbury, James, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Yash Katariya, Chris Leary, Dougal Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao Zhang (2018). JAX: Composable Transformations of Python+NumPy Programs . url :

http://github.com/jax-ml/jax .Bussieck, Michael R. and Alexander Meeraus (2004). “General Algebraic Modeling System (GAMS)”. In: Modeling Languages in Mathematical Optimization . Ed. by Josef Kallrath. Vol. 88. Applied Optimization. Boston, MA: Springer, pp. 137–157. doi : 10.1007/978-1-4613-0215-5_8 .Carpentier, Jean (1962). “Contribution ` a l’´ etude du dispatching ´ economique”. In: Bulletin de la Soci´ et´ e Fran¸ caise des ´Electriciens . 8th ser. 3.32, pp. 431–447. Chiang, Naiyuan, Cosmin G. Petra, and Victor M. Zavala (Aug. 2014). “Structured Nonconvex Opti-mization of Large-Scale Energy Systems Using PIPS-NLP”. In: 2014 Power Systems Computation Conference , pp. 1–7. doi : 10.1109/PSCC.2014.7038374 . (Visited on 11/21/2023). Churavy, Valentin (Apr. 2025). KernelAbstractions.jl . doi : 10.5281/zenodo.4021259 . url : https: //github.com/JuliaGPU/KernelAbstractions.jl (visited on 04/03/2025). Coffrin, Carleton, Russell Bent, Kaarthik Sundar, Yeesian Ng, and Miles Lubin (June 2018). “PowerModels. JL: An Open-Source Framework for Exploring Power Flow Formulations”. In: 2018 Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC) , pp. 1–8. doi : 10.23919/PSCC.2018.8442948 .(Visited on 11/26/2023). Cole, David L. and Victor M. Zavala (2024). “PlasmoData.jl — A Julia Framework for Modeling and Analyzing Complex Data as Graphs”. In: Computers & Chemical Engineering 185, p. 108679. 

doi : 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2024.108679 . arXiv: 2401.11404 . (Visited on 05/08/2024). Diamond, Steven and Stephen Boyd (2016). “CVXPY: A Python-Embedded Modeling Language for Convex Optimization”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 17.83, pp. 1–5. url :

https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v17/15-408.html .Dolan, E. D. and J. J. Mor´ e (Jan. 2001). Benchmarking Optimization Software with COPS . Technical Report ANL/MCS-TM-246. Argonne, IL: Argonne National Laboratory. doi : 10.2172/775270 .(Visited on 07/20/2025). Dowson, Oscar and Michel Schanen (2022). MathOptSymbolicAD.jl: Symbolic Automatic Differenti-ation for MathOptInterface . url : https://github.com/lanl-ansi/MathOptSymbolicAD.jl .Dunning, Iain, Joey Huchette, and Miles Lubin (2017). “JuMP: A Modeling Language for Mathe-matical Optimization”. In: SIAM Review 59.2, pp. 295–320. doi : 10.1137/15M1020575 . (Visited on 11/30/2023). Fourer, Robert, David M. Gay, and Brian W. Kernighan (May 1990). “A Modeling Language for Mathematical Programming”. In: Management Science 36.5, pp. 519–554. doi : 10.1287/mnsc. 36.5.519 . (Visited on 11/30/2023). Gay, David M. (2018). “Revisiting Expression Representations for Nonlinear AMPL Models”. In: Numerical Analysis and Optimization . Ed. by Mehiddin Al-Baali, Lucio Grandinetti, and Anton Purnama. Vol. 235. Springer Proceedings in Mathematics & Statistics. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 99–118. doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-90026-1_5 .Gebremedhin, Assefaw Hadish, Fredrik Manne, and Alex Pothen (2005). “What Color Is Your Jacobian? Graph Coloring for Computing Derivatives”. In: SIAM Review 47.4, pp. 629–705. doi :

10.1137/S0036144504444711 .Goddard, Robert H. (1919). A Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes . Smithsonian Miscellaneous Col-lections Vol. 71, No. 2. Smithsonian Institution Publication 2540. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution. Gould, Nicholas I. M., Dominique Orban, and Philippe L. Toint (Apr. 2015). “CUTEst: A Constrained and Unconstrained Testing Environment with Safe Threads for Mathematical Optimization”. In: 61 Computational Optimization and Applications 60.3, pp. 545–557. doi : 10.1007/s10589-014-9687-3 . (Visited on 07/20/2025). Griewank, Andreas and Philippe L. Toint (1982). “On the Unconstrained Optimization of Partially Separable Functions”. In: Nonlinear Optimization 1981 . Ed. by M. J. D. Powell. London: Academic Press, pp. 301–312. Griewank, Andreas and Andrea Walther (2008). Evaluating Derivatives: Principles and Techniques of Algorithmic Differentiation . 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. doi : 10.1137/1.9780898717761 .Hart, William E., Carl D. Laird, Jean-Paul Watson, David L. Woodruff, Gabriel A. Hackebeil, Bethany L. Nicholson, and John D. Siirola (2017). Pyomo — Optimization Modeling in Python .2nd. Vol. 67. Springer Optimization and Its Applications. Cham: Springer International Publishing. 

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-58821-6 . (Visited on 01/31/2025). Hart, William E., Jean-Paul Watson, and David L. Woodruff (Sept. 2011). “Pyomo: Modeling and Solving Mathematical Programs in Python”. In: Mathematical Programming Computation 3.3, pp. 219–260. doi : 10.1007/s12532-011-0026-8 . (Visited on 11/30/2023). Hijazi, Hassan, Guanglei Wang, and Carleton Coffrin (Oct. 2018). “Gravity: A Mathematical Modeling Language for Optimization and Machine Learning”. In: Machine Learning Open Source Software Workshop at NeurIPS 2018 . url : https://openreview.net/forum?id=SygqpT-2YQ 

(visited on 11/30/2023). Innes, Mike (2018). Don’t Unroll Adjoint: Differentiating SSA-Form Programs . arXiv: 1810.07951 [cs] .Jalving, Jordan, Sungho Shin, and Victor M. Zavala (Dec. 2022). “A Graph-Based Modeling Abstraction for Optimization: Concepts and Implementation in Plasmo.jl”. In: Mathematical Programming Computation 14.4, pp. 699–747. doi : 10.1007/s12532-022-00223-3 . (Visited on 11/25/2023). Johnson, Sanjay, Dirk Lauinger, Sungho Shin, and Fran¸ cois Pacaud (2025). ExaModelsPower.Jl: A GPU-compatible Modeling Library for Nonlinear Power System Optimization . doi : 10.48550/ arXiv.2510.12897 . eprint: 2510.12897 (math). url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.12897 .Kim, Youngdae, Fran¸ cois Pacaud, Michel Schanen, Kibaek Kim, and Mihai Anitescu (2025). “Leveraging GPU Batching for Scalable Nonlinear Programming through Massive Lagrangian Decomposition”. In: SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 47.5, B1133–B1157. doi : 10.1137/ 21M1450112 . arXiv: 2106.14995 . (Visited on 03/28/2024). Lubin, Miles, Oscar Dowson, Joaquim Dias Garcia, Joey Huchette, Benoˆ ıt Legat, and Juan Pablo Vielma (Sept. 2023). “JuMP 1.0: Recent Improvements to a Modeling Language for Mathematical Optimization”. In: Mathematical Programming Computation 15.3, pp. 581–589. doi : 10.1007/ s12532-023-00239-3 . (Visited on 02/01/2024). Lubin, Miles, Cosmin G. Petra, Mihai Anitescu, and Victor M. Zavala (Nov. 2011). “Scalable Stochastic Optimization of Complex Energy Systems”. In: Proceedings of 2011 International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis . SC ’11. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 64, 64:1–64:64. doi : 10.1145/2063384.2063470 .(Visited on 11/29/2023). Lukˇ san, Ladislav and Jan Vlˇ cek (1999). Sparse and Partially Separable Test Problems for Uncon-strained and Equality Constrained Optimization . Technical Report V-767. Prague: Institute of Computer Science, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. url : http://hdl.handle.net/ 11104/0123965 .MadSuite (2024). COPSBenchmark.jl . MadNLP. Version 0.2.0. ExaModels.jl and JuMP implemen-tations of the COPS problems. url : https://github.com/MadNLP/COPSBenchmark.jl (visited on 08/05/2026). 62 MadSuite (2026). LuksanVlcekBenchmark.jl . MadNLP. Version 1.0.0-DEV. ExaModels.jl and JuMP implementations of the Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek problems. url : https://github.com/MadNLP/ LuksanVlcekBenchmark.jl (visited on 08/05/2026). Margossian, Charles C. (2019). “A Review of Automatic Differentiation and Its Efficient Implemen-tation”. In: WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 9.4, e1305. doi : 10.1002/widm.1305 .Migot, Tangi, Alexis Montoison, Dominique Orban, Abel Soares Siqueira, and contributors (2025). ADNLPModels.jl: Automatic Differentiation Models Implementing the NLPMod-els API . Version 0.8.13. doi : 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 4605982 . url : https : / / github . com / JuliaSmoothOptimizers/ADNLPModels.jl (visited on 08/05/2026). Moses, William and Valentin Churavy (2020). “Instead of Rewriting Foreign Code for Machine Learn-ing, Automatically Synthesize Fast Gradients”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 12472–12485. url : https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper_files/paper/2020/hash/9332c513ef44b682e9347822c2e457ac- Abstract.html 

(visited on 01/23/2024). Naumann, Uwe (2012). The Art of Differentiating Computer Programs: An Introduction to Algo-rithmic Differentiation . Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. doi :

10.1137/1.9781611972078 .Nocedal, Jorge and Stephen J. Wright (2006). Numerical Optimization . 2nd. Springer Series in Operations Research and Financial Engineering. New York, NY: Springer. doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-40065-5 .NVIDIA Corporation (2024). NVIDIA HGX B200 Datasheet . url : https://resources.nvidia. com/en-us-dgx-systems/dgx-b200-datasheet (visited on 08/11/2026). – (2025). NVIDIA RTX PRO Blackwell GPU Architecture, v1.0 . url : https : / / www . nvidia . com/content/dam/en-zz/Solutions/design-visualization/quadro-product-literature/ NVIDIA-RTX-Blackwell-PRO-GPU-Architecture-v1.0.pdf (visited on 08/11/2026). Orban, Dominique, Abel Soares Siqueira, and contributors (2023). NLPModels.jl: Data Structures for Optimization Models . Version 0.20.0. doi : 10.5281/zenodo.2558627 . url : https://github. com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/NLPModels.jl (visited on 08/05/2026). Pacaud, Fran¸ cois and Sungho Shin (2024). “GPU-accelerated Dynamic Nonlinear Optimization with ExaModels and MadNLP”. In: 2024 IEEE 63rd Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) .IEEE, pp. 5963–5968. doi : 10.1109/CDC56724.2024.10886720 . arXiv: 2403.15913 . (Visited on 05/12/2024). Pacaud, Fran¸ cois, Sungho Shin, Alexis Montoison, Michel Schanen, and Mihai Anitescu (May 2024). Condensed Interior-Point Methods for Scalable Nonlinear Programming on GPUs . Preprint; title revised in arXiv v3 (2026). Original v1 title: “Condensed-space methods for nonlinear programming on GPUs”. doi : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2405 . 14236 . arXiv: 2405 . 14236 [math] .(Visited on 05/29/2024). Paszke, Adam, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala (2019). “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc. url : https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/hash/ bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Abstract.html (visited on 01/23/2024). Revels, Jarrett, Miles Lubin, and Theodore Papamarkou (2016). Forward-Mode Automatic Differ-entiation in Julia . Extended abstract accepted at AD2016 — 7th International Conference on Algorithmic Differentiation. doi : 10.48550/arXiv.1607.07892 . arXiv: 1607.07892 [cs.MS] .63 Sarnoff, Jeffrey and JuliaMath (2022). DoubleFloats.jl: A High-Performance Type for Accurate Extended Precision Math . Version 1.2.2. url : https://github.com/JuliaMath/DoubleFloats. jl (visited on 08/05/2026). Shin, Sungho, Mihai Anitescu, and Fran¸ cois Pacaud (Nov. 2024). “Accelerating Optimal Power Flow with GPUs: SIMD Abstraction of Nonlinear Programs and Condensed-Space Interior-Point Methods”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 236, p. 110651. doi : 10.1016/j.epsr.2024. 110651 . (Visited on 10/21/2024). Shin, Sungho and contributors (Feb. 2025). ExaModels.jl . Exanauts. Version 0.11.2. Documentation: 

https://exanauts.github.io/ExaModels.jl/stable . url : https://github.com/exanauts/ ExaModels.jl (visited on 04/11/2025). Shin, Sungho, Fran¸ cois Pacaud, and Alexis Montoison (Apr. 2025). MadNLP.jl . MadNLP. doi : 10. 5281/zenodo.5825776 . url : https://github.com/MadNLP/MadNLP.jl (visited on 04/11/2025). Vanaret, Charlie and Sven Leyffer (June 2026). “Implementing a unified solver for nonlinearly constrained optimization”. In: Mathematical Programming Computation . Published online 10 June 2026; not yet assigned to a volume or issue. doi : 10.1007/s12532-026-00310-9 . arXiv: 

2406.13454 .W¨ achter, Andreas and Lorenz T. Biegler (Mar. 2006). “On the Implementation of an Interior-Point Filter Line-Search Algorithm for Large-Scale Nonlinear Programming”. In: Mathematical Programming 106.1, pp. 25–57. doi : 10.1007/s10107-004-0559-y . (Visited on 02/13/2024). Zimmerman, Ray Daniel, Carlos Edmundo Murillo-Sanchez, and Robert John Thomas (Feb. 2011). “MATPOWER: Steady-State Operations, Planning, and Analysis Tools for Power Systems Research and Education”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 26.1, pp. 12–19. doi : 10.1109/TPWRS. 2010.2051168 .

# A Compiled LLVM Code for a Gradient Kernel 

This appendix reproduces the LLVM code that the Julia compiler generates for an ExaModels.jl gradient kernel. The listing supports the claim of Section 1.1: in a language built on multiple dispatch and JIT compilation, operator overloading can produce derivative evaluation code as free of overhead as source-code transformation. The model is the extended Rosenbrock objective (4), declared over a data iterator as 

@add obj(core, 100*(x[i-1]^2 - x[i])^2 + (x[i-1]-1)^2 for i in 2:N) . The function lowered is the per-data-point gradient kernel of Section 5.1. It receives one data point p, computes the gradient contribution of that point, and accumulates it into the output array. The kernel depends only on the argument types, not on the data iterator contents, so the same code serves every data point and every N . The listing was produced with @code llvm debuginfo=:none on Julia 1.12.6 with ExaModels.jl v0.11.2. The annotation comments, marked ;; , are ours, and everything else is reproduced verbatim. In the signature, the second argument is the parameterized expression tree, and its fully concrete type spells out the entire algebraic structure of the pattern (Section 4.2.3). In the body, the global indices of x[i-1] 

and x[i] are computed from the data point p and the offsets stored in the Var leaves. The body is a single basic block of straight-line code: the forward evaluation and the reverse pass are fully inlined, and there are no function calls, no branches, no dynamic dispatch, and no memory allocation. The generated code is also nearly minimal in its operation count. The body contains 13 floating-point operations, namely 8 multiplications, 3 subtractions, and 2 additions. The two sitofp instructions convert the integer constants embedded in the tree and involve no arithmetic on the data. For comparison, write 

u = xi−1, v = xi, a for the seed adjoint, and y for the gradient output. The same computation, both gradient 

64 contributions and their accumulation into y, can be hand-written with 12 operations: 

t = u · u, s = t − v, h = a · s, m = 200 h, p = u · m, p2 = p + p, r = u − 1, z = a · r, z2 = z + z, q = p2 + z2, yi−1 ← yi−1 + q, yi ← yi − m, 

that is, 5 multiplications, 3 subtractions, and 4 additions. We are not aware of a shorter sequence. The generated kernel is thus one operation off the best hand-written count we could construct. The difference is a factoring choice rather than interpretive overhead. The kernel forms the local derivatives 2 u, 2 s, and 2( u − 1) as multiplications during the forward pass, whereas the hand-written sequence replaces two of them with the doublings p + p and z + z. The listing shows the code shape that source-code transformation aims to produce, obtained here from the operator-overloading construction. The only code generation involved is the Julia compiler’s own lowering to the LLVM intermediate representation, which any compiled language performs. There is no separate source-level code-generation step.  

> 1

; Function Signature: gradient!(Array{Float64, 1}, ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(+)), ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(*)), Int64, ExaModels.Node1{typeof(Base.abs2), ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(-)), ExaModels.Node1{typeof(Base.abs2), ExaModels.Var{ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(+)), ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(-)), ExaModels.DataSource, Int64}, Int64}}}, ExaModels.Var{ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(+)), ExaModels.DataSource, Int64}}}}}, ExaModels.Node1{typeof(Base.abs2), ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(-)), ExaModels.Var{ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(+)), ExaModels.Node2{typeof(Base.:(-)), ExaModels.DataSource, Int64}, Int64}}, Int64}}}, Array{Float64, 1}, Array{Float64, 1}, Int64, Float64)  

> 2

define nonnull ptr @"julia_gradient!_3566"(ptr noundef nonnull align 8 dereferenceable(24) %"y::Array", ptr nocapture noundef nonnull readonly align 8 dereferenceable(56) %"f::Node2", ptr noundef nonnull align 8 dereferenceable(24) %"x::Array", ptr noundef nonnull align 8 dereferenceable(24) %"\CE\B8::Array", i64 signext %"p::Int64", double %"adj::Float64") #0 {  

> 3

top:  

> 45

;; forward pass: compute the global index of x[i-1] from the data point p  

> 6

;; and the offsets in the Var leaf; load it; evaluate abs2 and its derivative 2*x[i-1]  

> 7

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr" = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %"f::Node2", i64 8  

> 8

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.unbox" = load i64, ptr %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr", align 8  

> 9

%0 = sub i64 %"p::Int64", %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.unbox"  

> 10

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.inner2_ptr" = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %"f::Node2", i64 16  

> 11

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.inner2_ptr.unbox" = load i64, ptr %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.inner2_ptr", align 8  

> 12

%1 = add i64 %0, %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.inner2_ptr.unbox"  

> 13

%memoryref_data = load ptr, ptr %"x::Array", align 8  

> 14

%memoryref_offset = shl i64 %1, 3  

> 15

%2 = getelementptr i8, ptr %memoryref_data, i64 %memoryref_offset  

> 16

%memoryref_data1 = getelementptr i8, ptr %2, i64 -8  

> 17

%3 = load double, ptr %memoryref_data1, align 8  

> 18

%4 = fmul double %3, %3  

> 19

%5 = fmul double %3, 2.000000e+00  

> 20 21

;; likewise locate and load x[i]; evaluate x[i-1]^2 - x[i] and its local derivative  

> 22

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.inner2_ptr2" = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %"f::Node2", i64 24  

> 23

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.inner2_ptr2.unbox" = load i64, ptr %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.inner2_ptr2", align 8  

> 24

%6 = add i64 %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr.inner2_ptr2.unbox", %"p::Int64"  

> 25

%memoryref_offset9 = shl i64 %6, 3  

> 26

%7 = getelementptr i8, ptr %memoryref_data, i64 %memoryref_offset9  

> 27

%memoryref_data15 = getelementptr i8, ptr %7, i64 -8  

> 28

%8 = load double, ptr %memoryref_data15, align 8  

> 29

%9 = fsub double %4, %8  

> 30

%10 = fmul double %9, 2.000000e+00  

> 31 32

;; load the constant coefficient 100 from the tree  

> 33

%"f::Node2.unbox" = load i64, ptr %"f::Node2", align 8  

> 34

%11 = sitofp i64 %"f::Node2.unbox" to double  

> 35 36

;; second term: locate and load x[i-1] and the constant 1; evaluate x[i-1] - 1  

> 37

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16" = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %"f::Node2", i64 32  

> 38

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.unbox" = load i64, ptr %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16", align 8  

> 39

%12 = sub i64 %"p::Int64", %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.unbox" 

65 40 %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.inner2_ptr" = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %"f::Node2", i64 40  

> 41

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.inner2_ptr.unbox" = load i64, ptr %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.inner2_ptr", align 8  

> 42

%13 = add i64 %12, %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.inner2_ptr.unbox"  

> 43

%memoryref_offset23 = shl i64 %13, 3  

> 44

%14 = getelementptr i8, ptr %memoryref_data, i64 %memoryref_offset23  

> 45

%memoryref_data29 = getelementptr i8, ptr %14, i64 -8  

> 46

%15 = load double, ptr %memoryref_data29, align 8  

> 47

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.inner2_ptr30" = getelementptr inbounds i8, ptr %"f::Node2", i64 48  

> 48

%"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.inner2_ptr30.unbox" = load i64, ptr %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.inner2_ptr30", align 8  

> 49

%16 = sitofp i64 %"f::Node2.inner2_ptr16.inner2_ptr30.unbox" to double  

> 50

%17 = fsub double %15, %16  

> 51

%18 = fmul double %17, 2.000000e+00  

> 52 53

;; reverse pass: propagate the seed adjoint down the tree by the chain rule  

> 54

%19 = fmul double %11, %"adj::Float64"  

> 55

%20 = fmul double %10, %19  

> 56

%21 = fmul double %5, %20  

> 57 58

;; accumulate the first term’s contributions into y[i-1] and y[i]  

> 59

%memoryref_data32 = load ptr, ptr %"y::Array", align 8  

> 60

%22 = getelementptr i8, ptr %memoryref_data32, i64 %memoryref_offset  

> 61

%memoryref_data40 = getelementptr i8, ptr %22, i64 -8  

> 62

%23 = load double, ptr %memoryref_data40, align 8  

> 63

%24 = fadd double %21, %23  

> 64

store double %24, ptr %memoryref_data40, align 8  

> 65

%25 = getelementptr i8, ptr %memoryref_data32, i64 %memoryref_offset9  

> 66

%memoryref_data66 = getelementptr i8, ptr %25, i64 -8  

> 67

%26 = load double, ptr %memoryref_data66, align 8  

> 68

%27 = fsub double %26, %20  

> 69

store double %27, ptr %memoryref_data66, align 8  

> 70 71

;; accumulate the second term’s contribution into y[i-1]  

> 72

%28 = fmul double %18, %"adj::Float64"  

> 73

%29 = getelementptr i8, ptr %memoryref_data32, i64 %memoryref_offset23  

> 74

%memoryref_data92 = getelementptr i8, ptr %29, i64 -8  

> 75

%30 = load double, ptr %memoryref_data92, align 8  

> 76

%31 = fadd double %28, %30  

> 77

store double %31, ptr %memoryref_data92, align 8  

> 78

ret ptr %"y::Array"  

> 79

}

# B Per-Instance Benchmark Results 

This appendix presents the complete per-instance benchmark data. For each suite, we report the wall time in seconds for the callbacks NLPModels.obj , NLPModels.cons! , NLPModels.grad! , NLPModels.jac coord! ,and NLPModels.hess coord! . The backend column names the framework and, in parentheses, the platform of Table 2 on which it ran. An asterisk on a platform label marks timings taken in Float32 arithmetic. For each instance, the best time in each column is shown in bold. 

Table 8: Per-instance callback times (seconds) for the Lukˇ san–Vlˇ cek benchmark suite. 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

augmented lagrangian-20 20 18 54 106 CPU (C3) 9.00e-08 1.10e-07 1.40e-07 1.60e-07 4.70e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.30e-07 1.80e-07 4.40e-07 2.80e-07 7.70e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 2.10e-07 1.90e-07 3.90e-07 2.90e-07 7.70e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 2.10e-07 1.90e-07 4.30e-07 2.80e-07 7.80e-07 CUDA (N1) 4.45e-05 5.20e-06 2.18e-05 1.15e-05 1.74e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.41e-05 7.91e-06 3.12e-05 1.60e-05 2.56e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.55e-05 6.45e-06 2.56e-05 1.22e-05 2.10e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.34e-05 4.64e-06 1.85e-05 8.58e-06 1.50e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.40e-05 5.06e-06 2.03e-05 9.62e-06 1.64e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.15e-05 1.24e-05 4.97e-05 2.43e-05 3.85e-05 

66 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

oneAPI (I1) 1.19e-04 8.56e-06 4.93e-05 2.11e-05 5.56e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.15e-04 8.26e-06 2.64e-05 1.35e-05 3.45e-05 augmented lagrangian-2000 2k 2k 6k 11k CPU (C3) 5.24e-06 7.17e-06 1.12e-05 1.54e-05 4.64e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 4.91e-06 1.15e-05 2.69e-05 1.82e-05 4.46e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 4.87e-06 1.20e-05 2.60e-05 1.87e-05 4.20e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 4.88e-06 9.02e-06 1.96e-05 1.44e-05 3.97e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.66e-05 6.01e-06 2.67e-05 1.27e-05 2.37e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.33e-05 7.88e-06 2.95e-05 1.42e-05 2.70e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.65e-05 6.77e-06 2.70e-05 1.23e-05 2.14e-05 

CUDA (N4) 2.62e-05 5.38e-06 1.95e-05 8.87e-06 2.93e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.10e-05 7.72e-06 3.01e-05 1.32e-05 2.87e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 7.19e-05 1.20e-05 4.78e-05 2.40e-05 3.85e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.47e-04 8.74e-06 5.13e-05 2.13e-05 5.52e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.33e-04 8.05e-06 2.76e-05 1.39e-05 5.19e-05 augmented lagrangian-200000 200k 200k 600k 1.1M CPU (C3) 5.25e-04 7.26e-04 1.14e-03 1.54e-03 4.74e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 2.93e-04 1.62e-04 1.06e-03 5.21e-04 1.42e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.93e-04 9.02e-05 7.16e-04 3.55e-04 8.77e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.27e-04 7.73e-05 8.69e-04 4.04e-04 8.17e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.70e-05 4.65e-06 1.91e-05 1.02e-05 3.53e-05 

CUDA (N2) 6.07e-05 8.32e-06 3.22e-05 1.89e-05 9.16e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.19e-05 7.64e-06 3.04e-05 1.39e-05 6.90e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.56e-05 9.21e-06 2.49e-05 1.54e-05 9.52e-05 CUDA (N6) 5.01e-05 9.03e-06 2.63e-05 1.18e-05 1.03e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.75e-05 1.11e-05 4.42e-05 2.21e-05 7.09e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.72e-04 9.04e-06 5.00e-05 2.27e-05 1.53e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.68e-04 1.72e-05 7.74e-05 4.07e-05 2.92e-04 broyden banded-20 40 29 171 256 CPU (C3) 1.50e-07 1.80e-07 2.60e-07 4.10e-07 1.08e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.50e-07 2.02e-06 4.80e-07 2.30e-06 3.36e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 2.40e-07 1.91e-06 4.70e-07 2.42e-06 3.39e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 2.60e-07 1.94e-06 5.10e-07 2.46e-06 3.30e-06 CUDA (N1) 3.79e-05 4.53e-05 1.64e-05 5.16e-05 6.97e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.22e-05 7.38e-05 2.94e-05 9.06e-05 1.08e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.75e-05 7.10e-05 2.78e-05 8.63e-05 1.05e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.34e-05 4.55e-05 1.83e-05 5.47e-05 6.68e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.81e-05 6.07e-05 2.12e-05 7.02e-05 8.50e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.87e-05 1.04e-04 4.56e-05 1.20e-04 1.36e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.17e-04 9.01e-05 3.61e-05 1.60e-04 1.98e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.96e-04 8.02e-05 2.39e-05 8.11e-05 9.42e-05 broyden banded-2000 4k 3k 19k 28k CPU (C3) 1.17e-05 1.13e-05 2.26e-05 4.03e-05 1.14e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 2.52e-05 1.52e-05 3.80e-05 3.53e-05 8.94e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.07e-05 1.10e-05 2.49e-05 2.90e-05 7.96e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.32e-05 1.26e-05 3.49e-05 2.91e-05 7.70e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.64e-05 4.37e-05 1.87e-05 5.23e-05 6.78e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.35e-05 7.60e-05 2.82e-05 9.01e-05 1.12e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.72e-05 6.47e-05 2.53e-05 7.57e-05 1.05e-04 CUDA (N4) 4.17e-05 4.63e-05 4.08e-05 5.38e-05 1.18e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.22e-05 5.76e-05 4.18e-05 6.13e-05 1.28e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.49e-05 1.07e-04 4.75e-05 1.23e-04 1.39e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.18e-04 9.71e-05 3.67e-05 1.70e-04 2.26e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.92e-04 7.96e-05 2.42e-05 8.33e-05 1.00e-04 broyden banded-200000 400k 300k 1.9M 2.8M CPU (C3) 1.17e-03 1.14e-03 2.29e-03 4.14e-03 1.17e-02 CPU-4T (C3) 8.77e-04 2.07e-04 2.00e-03 1.30e-03 3.46e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 7.24e-04 1.26e-04 2.08e-03 1.22e-03 2.30e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 4.54e-04 1.26e-04 2.34e-03 1.11e-03 1.76e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.26e-05 5.30e-05 2.20e-05 6.33e-05 7.73e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.67e-05 8.14e-05 3.10e-05 1.10e-04 1.90e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.67e-05 6.46e-05 2.53e-05 7.51e-05 1.19e-04 CUDA (N4) 6.25e-05 4.61e-05 8.08e-05 8.65e-05 2.50e-04 CUDA (N6) 7.39e-05 5.05e-05 8.15e-05 6.00e-05 2.23e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 8.34e-05 1.05e-04 4.47e-05 1.15e-04 1.34e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.05e-04 1.06e-04 3.66e-05 2.01e-04 3.21e-04 

67 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.64e-04 7.62e-05 8.33e-05 3.17e-04 5.17e-04 broyden tridiagonal-20 20 16 80 194 CPU (C3) 1.40e-07 8.00e-08 2.50e-07 1.50e-07 6.90e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.60e-07 1.70e-07 6.30e-07 2.50e-07 1.12e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 3.70e-07 1.60e-07 6.20e-07 2.60e-07 1.13e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 3.60e-07 1.60e-07 6.10e-07 2.50e-07 1.11e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.82e-05 5.81e-06 2.65e-05 1.08e-05 2.41e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.88e-05 7.58e-06 3.51e-05 1.36e-05 3.20e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.08e-05 6.46e-06 3.11e-05 1.22e-05 2.77e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.76e-05 4.72e-06 2.25e-05 8.72e-06 2.34e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.05e-05 5.80e-06 2.71e-05 1.09e-05 3.46e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.31e-05 1.16e-05 5.66e-05 2.26e-05 4.75e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.45e-04 1.07e-05 5.60e-05 2.49e-05 6.04e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.06e-04 6.74e-06 3.08e-05 1.24e-05 3.06e-05 broyden tridiagonal-2000 2k 2k 10k 22k CPU (C3) 1.07e-05 3.67e-06 2.20e-05 1.57e-05 7.23e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 2.42e-05 5.54e-06 3.77e-05 1.82e-05 6.00e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.18e-05 3.27e-06 2.50e-05 1.21e-05 4.36e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.30e-05 3.43e-06 2.99e-05 1.22e-05 4.99e-05 CUDA (N1) 5.91e-05 5.36e-06 2.68e-05 1.09e-05 2.56e-05 

CUDA (N2) 6.88e-05 8.11e-06 4.21e-05 1.56e-05 3.55e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.29e-05 6.50e-06 3.24e-05 1.25e-05 2.89e-05 CUDA (N4) 4.68e-05 5.76e-06 4.92e-05 9.04e-06 7.67e-05 CUDA (N6) 5.88e-05 5.55e-06 5.35e-05 1.03e-05 8.59e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 8.28e-05 1.24e-05 6.09e-05 2.40e-05 5.10e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.22e-04 1.08e-05 6.11e-05 2.48e-05 5.99e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.26e-04 7.00e-06 3.19e-05 1.36e-05 3.55e-05 broyden tridiagonal-200000 200k 200k 1000k 2.2M CPU (C3) 1.08e-03 3.69e-04 2.23e-03 1.61e-03 7.47e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.29e-03 4.73e-05 3.77e-03 5.97e-04 2.26e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 7.07e-04 9.74e-05 1.95e-03 4.72e-04 1.39e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 4.49e-04 4.20e-05 2.42e-03 5.91e-04 1.37e-03 CUDA (N1) 6.52e-05 6.57e-06 3.02e-05 1.72e-05 4.17e-05 

CUDA (N2) 6.33e-05 7.26e-06 3.96e-05 4.69e-05 1.01e-04 CUDA (N3) 5.42e-05 6.58e-06 3.27e-05 3.15e-05 6.87e-05 CUDA (N4) 6.73e-05 9.71e-06 9.02e-05 3.55e-05 1.98e-04 CUDA (N6) 8.50e-05 9.44e-06 9.39e-05 2.36e-05 1.55e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 1.14e-04 1.14e-05 5.71e-05 2.29e-05 5.88e-05 oneAPI (I1) 3.18e-04 1.13e-05 6.04e-05 6.71e-05 1.50e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.68e-04 1.88e-05 1.06e-04 1.13e-04 2.53e-04 chained hs46-20 20 11 33 79 CPU (C3) 7.00e-08 9.00e-08 9.00e-08 1.30e-07 3.20e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.70e-07 3.00e-07 3.50e-07 4.50e-07 7.30e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.80e-07 2.90e-07 3.40e-07 3.80e-07 7.50e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 1.90e-07 3.10e-07 3.40e-07 3.90e-07 7.30e-07 CUDA (N1) 4.72e-05 1.43e-05 2.64e-05 1.95e-05 2.73e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.02e-05 1.65e-05 2.77e-05 2.33e-05 3.56e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.52e-05 1.46e-05 2.47e-05 2.07e-05 3.03e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.26e-05 1.05e-05 1.71e-05 1.44e-05 2.11e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.96e-05 1.43e-05 2.71e-05 2.26e-05 3.20e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.22e-05 2.45e-05 4.71e-05 3.65e-05 5.14e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.09e-04 1.85e-05 3.79e-05 3.72e-05 6.14e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.86e-04 1.31e-05 2.39e-05 2.03e-05 2.74e-05 chained hs46-2000 2k 1k 4k 9k CPU (C3) 4.57e-06 6.22e-06 7.71e-06 1.31e-05 3.53e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 4.91e-06 5.22e-06 2.70e-05 1.01e-05 2.95e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 4.93e-06 5.45e-06 2.74e-05 1.03e-05 2.96e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 4.95e-06 5.26e-06 1.49e-05 1.03e-05 2.96e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.18e-05 1.11e-05 1.90e-05 1.63e-05 2.08e-05 

CUDA (N2) 4.51e-05 1.84e-05 3.07e-05 2.56e-05 3.99e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.88e-05 1.77e-05 2.88e-05 2.36e-05 3.51e-05 CUDA (N4) 4.30e-05 1.72e-05 3.91e-05 2.01e-05 8.56e-05 CUDA (N6) 5.61e-05 1.70e-05 3.94e-05 1.94e-05 9.14e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.80e-05 2.38e-05 4.38e-05 3.37e-05 4.77e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.13e-04 1.83e-05 3.71e-05 3.72e-05 5.95e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.82e-04 1.54e-05 2.44e-05 2.03e-05 2.83e-05 

68 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

chained hs46-200000 200k 133k 400k 933k CPU (C3) 4.48e-04 6.24e-04 7.80e-04 1.33e-03 3.56e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 3.47e-04 1.56e-04 1.37e-03 4.09e-04 1.09e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 2.79e-04 9.80e-05 1.24e-03 2.96e-04 7.40e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.83e-04 1.12e-04 1.60e-03 3.49e-04 7.04e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.70e-05 9.23e-06 2.00e-05 1.57e-05 2.64e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.43e-05 1.73e-05 2.87e-05 2.37e-05 4.42e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.88e-05 1.58e-05 2.55e-05 2.06e-05 3.22e-05 CUDA (N4) 5.73e-05 2.46e-05 6.06e-05 2.97e-05 1.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 6.88e-05 2.52e-05 6.07e-05 2.94e-05 1.04e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 9.72e-05 2.33e-05 4.50e-05 3.49e-05 5.19e-05 oneAPI (I1) 3.18e-04 1.95e-05 3.94e-05 3.92e-05 6.11e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.60e-04 1.65e-05 6.73e-05 3.83e-05 9.20e-05 chained hs47-20 20 11 30 57 CPU (C3) 5.00e-08 6.00e-08 9.00e-08 5.00e-08 1.00e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.90e-07 4.00e-07 3.30e-07 5.90e-07 8.10e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-07 4.20e-07 3.20e-07 5.00e-07 8.00e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 2.00e-07 3.60e-07 3.30e-07 4.70e-07 7.50e-07 CUDA (N1) 4.58e-05 2.05e-05 2.51e-05 2.43e-05 3.37e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.43e-05 2.79e-05 3.16e-05 3.64e-05 5.52e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.45e-05 2.17e-05 2.46e-05 2.89e-05 4.22e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.26e-05 1.55e-05 1.77e-05 2.05e-05 3.10e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.34e-05 1.68e-05 1.92e-05 2.23e-05 3.33e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.86e-05 3.58e-05 4.63e-05 4.92e-05 6.30e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.20e-04 3.08e-05 4.16e-05 5.15e-05 8.13e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.10e-04 2.46e-05 2.57e-05 2.97e-05 4.43e-05 chained hs47-2000 2k 1k 4k 7k CPU (C3) 1.54e-06 1.16e-06 8.51e-06 1.92e-06 9.48e-06 CPU-4T (C3) 1.66e-06 1.89e-06 2.26e-05 2.64e-06 8.71e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-06 1.96e-06 2.31e-05 2.52e-06 8.99e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.68e-06 1.87e-06 3.01e-05 2.51e-06 8.67e-06 

CUDA (N1) 4.85e-05 1.79e-05 2.23e-05 2.35e-05 3.35e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.12e-05 2.52e-05 2.88e-05 3.30e-05 5.31e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.62e-05 2.35e-05 2.52e-05 2.97e-05 4.27e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.32e-05 1.58e-05 1.80e-05 2.03e-05 2.93e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.82e-05 2.04e-05 2.70e-05 2.94e-05 4.14e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 7.12e-05 3.78e-05 4.75e-05 5.08e-05 6.56e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.48e-04 2.96e-05 4.30e-05 5.75e-05 8.37e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.87e-04 2.40e-05 2.78e-05 3.30e-05 5.07e-05 chained hs47-200000 200k 150k 400k 750k CPU (C3) 1.53e-04 1.19e-04 9.01e-04 2.01e-04 9.77e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 8.39e-05 7.15e-05 1.02e-03 2.62e-04 5.00e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 7.61e-05 6.28e-05 7.93e-04 2.75e-04 5.07e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.60e-05 1.39e-04 9.66e-04 3.06e-04 5.50e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.72e-05 1.37e-05 1.88e-05 1.95e-05 2.96e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.96e-05 2.62e-05 3.04e-05 3.52e-05 5.43e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.25e-05 2.48e-05 2.84e-05 3.34e-05 5.05e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.27e-05 1.69e-05 1.90e-05 2.28e-05 3.20e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.65e-05 2.13e-05 2.20e-05 2.88e-05 4.01e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 8.60e-05 3.73e-05 4.74e-05 4.99e-05 6.33e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.98e-04 2.95e-05 4.22e-05 5.45e-05 8.58e-05 Metal (M1 *) 4.56e-04 2.52e-05 6.20e-05 3.64e-05 1.07e-04 chained hs48-20 20 12 48 54 CPU (C3) 3.00e-08 6.00e-08 5.00e-08 6.00e-08 8.00e-08 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.60e-07 3.40e-07 3.30e-07 3.40e-07 5.80e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.50e-07 2.50e-07 3.00e-07 3.50e-07 5.80e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 1.60e-07 2.90e-07 3.20e-07 3.40e-07 5.80e-07 CUDA (N1) 4.21e-05 1.10e-05 2.08e-05 1.67e-05 2.26e-05 CUDA (N2) 3.91e-05 1.76e-05 2.91e-05 2.43e-05 3.91e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.62e-05 1.50e-05 2.44e-05 2.10e-05 3.13e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.29e-05 1.08e-05 1.72e-05 1.47e-05 2.20e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.47e-05 1.29e-05 2.19e-05 1.64e-05 2.63e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.08e-05 2.39e-05 4.63e-05 3.61e-05 5.04e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.12e-04 1.89e-05 5.47e-05 3.81e-05 6.04e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.00e-04 1.77e-05 2.68e-05 2.53e-05 2.62e-05 

69 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

chained hs48-2000 2k 1k 5k 6k CPU (C3) 6.40e-07 1.46e-06 3.34e-06 3.66e-06 5.77e-06 CPU-4T (C3) 1.36e-06 2.20e-06 2.31e-05 2.76e-06 5.58e-06 

CPU-8T (C3) 1.35e-06 2.09e-06 2.54e-05 2.83e-06 5.59e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.36e-06 2.14e-06 1.09e-05 2.78e-06 5.63e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.49e-05 1.12e-05 2.26e-05 1.69e-05 2.31e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.46e-05 1.93e-05 3.19e-05 2.75e-05 4.06e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.66e-05 1.54e-05 2.50e-05 2.19e-05 3.09e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.46e-05 1.10e-05 1.83e-05 1.55e-05 2.23e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.45e-05 1.19e-05 2.02e-05 1.73e-05 2.42e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.96e-05 2.46e-05 4.74e-05 3.72e-05 5.12e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.21e-04 1.94e-05 3.90e-05 5.26e-05 6.05e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.96e-04 1.23e-05 2.23e-05 1.80e-05 2.67e-05 chained hs48-200000 200k 133k 533k 600k CPU (C3) 6.19e-05 1.49e-04 3.31e-04 4.16e-04 5.97e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 9.94e-05 7.77e-05 1.30e-03 3.25e-04 3.81e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 9.46e-05 5.57e-05 1.20e-03 3.38e-04 4.00e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 7.27e-05 8.81e-05 1.44e-03 3.43e-04 4.73e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.65e-05 1.42e-05 2.54e-05 1.99e-05 2.86e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.76e-05 1.73e-05 2.97e-05 2.47e-05 4.00e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.90e-05 1.55e-05 2.63e-05 2.13e-05 3.11e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.09e-05 1.11e-05 1.80e-05 1.56e-05 2.27e-05 

CUDA (N6) 4.88e-05 1.51e-05 2.40e-05 2.16e-05 3.08e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 9.86e-05 2.44e-05 4.72e-05 3.72e-05 5.15e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.43e-04 1.83e-05 3.77e-05 3.65e-05 6.07e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.61e-04 1.41e-05 6.40e-05 4.65e-05 6.41e-05 chained hs49-20 20 12 36 48 CPU (C3) 7.00e-08 6.00e-08 1.00e-07 5.00e-08 1.80e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.80e-07 2.60e-07 3.50e-07 3.40e-07 6.20e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.80e-07 2.40e-07 3.40e-07 3.00e-07 6.20e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 2.00e-07 2.40e-07 3.30e-07 3.10e-07 6.60e-07 CUDA (N1) 3.82e-05 9.70e-06 1.96e-05 1.60e-05 2.17e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.26e-05 1.78e-05 3.00e-05 2.48e-05 3.84e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.81e-05 1.67e-05 2.83e-05 2.47e-05 3.36e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.39e-05 1.09e-05 1.82e-05 1.61e-05 2.22e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.73e-05 1.39e-05 2.34e-05 2.09e-05 2.79e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.95e-05 2.28e-05 4.37e-05 3.43e-05 4.77e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.08e-04 1.87e-05 3.92e-05 3.72e-05 5.89e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.96e-04 1.17e-05 2.18e-05 1.77e-05 2.64e-05 chained hs49-2000 2k 1k 4k 5k CPU (C3) 4.45e-06 1.26e-06 7.77e-06 3.63e-06 1.61e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 5.27e-06 1.74e-06 2.77e-05 2.35e-06 1.38e-05 

CPU-8T (C3) 4.91e-06 1.70e-06 2.79e-05 2.25e-06 1.38e-05 

CPU-16T (C3) 4.97e-06 1.71e-06 1.50e-05 2.30e-06 1.39e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.86e-05 9.63e-06 1.86e-05 1.52e-05 2.03e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.31e-05 1.92e-05 3.12e-05 2.45e-05 4.44e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.73e-05 1.58e-05 2.54e-05 2.31e-05 3.17e-05 CUDA (N4) 4.30e-05 1.10e-05 3.94e-05 1.65e-05 6.47e-05 CUDA (N6) 5.37e-05 1.31e-05 4.00e-05 1.99e-05 6.77e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.82e-05 2.43e-05 4.55e-05 3.57e-05 4.95e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.15e-04 1.95e-05 4.03e-05 3.86e-05 6.07e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.91e-04 1.21e-05 2.29e-05 1.84e-05 2.73e-05 chained hs49-200000 200k 133k 400k 533k CPU (C3) 4.52e-04 1.25e-04 7.77e-04 3.88e-04 1.63e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 3.38e-04 6.26e-05 1.37e-03 2.49e-04 5.60e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 3.02e-04 4.90e-05 1.28e-03 2.62e-04 4.21e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.76e-04 8.54e-05 1.16e-03 2.74e-04 4.66e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.65e-05 1.16e-05 2.17e-05 1.72e-05 2.70e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.85e-05 1.83e-05 3.11e-05 2.65e-05 4.69e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.82e-05 1.49e-05 2.58e-05 2.31e-05 3.19e-05 CUDA (N4) 5.76e-05 1.09e-05 6.09e-05 1.70e-05 6.86e-05 CUDA (N6) 6.85e-05 1.19e-05 5.92e-05 1.85e-05 6.86e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 8.34e-05 2.44e-05 4.66e-05 3.62e-05 4.88e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.54e-04 1.89e-05 3.99e-05 3.74e-05 6.55e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.37e-04 1.37e-05 6.54e-05 4.27e-05 6.18e-05 

70 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

chained hs50-20 20 11 33 51 CPU (C3) 5.00e-08 6.00e-08 9.00e-08 5.00e-08 1.00e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.80e-07 3.50e-07 3.10e-07 4.60e-07 7.20e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-07 4.30e-07 3.00e-07 4.50e-07 7.60e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 2.00e-07 4.10e-07 3.30e-07 4.80e-07 8.70e-07 CUDA (N1) 4.32e-05 1.79e-05 1.99e-05 2.29e-05 3.17e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.14e-05 2.61e-05 2.85e-05 3.19e-05 5.20e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.54e-05 2.39e-05 2.72e-05 3.14e-05 4.02e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.22e-05 1.64e-05 1.75e-05 2.07e-05 2.70e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.89e-05 2.25e-05 2.85e-05 3.20e-05 4.09e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.15e-05 3.79e-05 4.84e-05 5.04e-05 6.47e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.12e-04 2.86e-05 4.31e-05 5.37e-05 8.03e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.97e-04 1.78e-05 2.40e-05 2.91e-05 3.41e-05 chained hs50-2000 2k 1k 4k 6k CPU (C3) 1.55e-06 1.33e-06 8.76e-06 3.24e-06 9.09e-06 CPU-4T (C3) 1.65e-06 1.94e-06 2.29e-05 2.59e-06 8.16e-06 

CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-06 2.08e-06 2.27e-05 2.55e-06 8.38e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.68e-06 2.01e-06 1.15e-05 2.59e-06 8.29e-06 CUDA (N1) 3.97e-05 1.55e-05 1.69e-05 2.17e-05 2.53e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.36e-05 2.89e-05 3.05e-05 3.58e-05 4.75e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.84e-05 2.57e-05 2.97e-05 3.41e-05 4.49e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.50e-05 1.68e-05 1.94e-05 2.21e-05 2.91e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.87e-05 2.11e-05 2.50e-05 2.78e-05 3.64e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.85e-05 3.55e-05 4.52e-05 4.65e-05 6.06e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.12e-04 2.90e-05 4.07e-05 5.36e-05 1.02e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.98e-04 1.79e-05 2.27e-05 2.49e-05 3.63e-05 chained hs50-200000 200k 150k 450k 650k CPU (C3) 1.53e-04 1.32e-04 9.14e-04 3.38e-04 9.20e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 8.33e-05 8.46e-05 1.03e-03 2.91e-04 4.47e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 7.29e-05 6.79e-05 9.07e-04 3.05e-04 4.46e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.51e-05 1.40e-04 1.15e-03 3.39e-04 5.42e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.30e-05 1.70e-05 2.18e-05 2.37e-05 3.09e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.74e-05 3.40e-05 3.11e-05 3.59e-05 6.38e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.86e-05 2.57e-05 2.59e-05 3.26e-05 4.38e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.16e-05 1.78e-05 1.85e-05 2.36e-05 3.00e-05 

CUDA (N6) 4.18e-05 2.14e-05 2.32e-05 2.57e-05 3.59e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 7.03e-05 3.51e-05 4.43e-05 4.57e-05 5.98e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.37e-04 4.32e-05 5.81e-05 5.67e-05 7.92e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.86e-04 1.84e-05 6.07e-05 4.01e-05 9.21e-05 chained hs51-20 20 11 26 39 CPU (C3) 5.00e-08 7.00e-08 6.00e-08 4.00e-08 1.00e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.50e-07 3.80e-07 3.00e-07 4.80e-07 7.30e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.80e-07 3.90e-07 2.90e-07 4.90e-07 7.50e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 1.50e-07 3.90e-07 2.90e-07 5.40e-07 8.60e-07 CUDA (N1) 4.43e-05 1.78e-05 2.23e-05 2.41e-05 3.08e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.39e-05 3.13e-05 3.24e-05 4.17e-05 6.37e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.60e-05 2.32e-05 2.56e-05 3.17e-05 4.86e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.35e-05 1.61e-05 1.81e-05 2.28e-05 3.59e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.33e-05 1.79e-05 2.04e-05 2.47e-05 4.07e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.02e-05 3.75e-05 4.78e-05 5.06e-05 6.55e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.10e-04 2.76e-05 3.96e-05 5.30e-05 8.11e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.08e-04 1.81e-05 2.27e-05 2.55e-05 3.42e-05 chained hs51-2000 2k 1k 3k 5k CPU (C3) 2.59e-06 1.23e-06 4.39e-06 1.59e-06 8.74e-06 CPU-4T (C3) 2.27e-06 1.69e-06 2.12e-05 2.13e-06 7.69e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 2.30e-06 1.71e-06 2.25e-05 2.21e-06 7.64e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 2.27e-06 1.71e-06 1.05e-05 2.20e-06 7.61e-06 

CUDA (N1) 4.53e-05 1.97e-05 2.52e-05 2.88e-05 3.28e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.15e-05 2.91e-05 2.96e-05 3.78e-05 5.89e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.86e-05 2.41e-05 2.70e-05 3.18e-05 5.20e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.02e-05 1.66e-05 1.86e-05 2.10e-05 3.39e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.06e-05 2.39e-05 2.94e-05 3.16e-05 4.91e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.99e-05 3.58e-05 4.49e-05 4.80e-05 6.24e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.54e-04 2.83e-05 4.37e-05 5.26e-05 8.96e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.98e-04 1.99e-05 2.22e-05 2.51e-05 3.73e-05 chained hs51-200000 200k 150k 350k 500k CPU (C3) 2.57e-04 1.15e-04 4.50e-04 1.67e-04 8.95e-04 

71 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.39e-04 7.00e-05 1.02e-03 2.34e-04 3.97e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 2.03e-04 5.95e-05 7.33e-04 2.46e-04 3.64e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.36e-04 1.41e-04 1.04e-03 2.77e-04 4.71e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.93e-05 1.68e-05 2.02e-05 1.95e-05 3.10e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.83e-05 2.86e-05 3.09e-05 3.95e-05 5.85e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.50e-05 2.60e-05 3.03e-05 3.52e-05 5.05e-05 CUDA (N4) 4.38e-05 1.77e-05 1.99e-05 2.27e-05 3.44e-05 CUDA (N6) 5.71e-05 2.11e-05 2.39e-05 2.80e-05 4.33e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 7.16e-05 3.71e-05 4.40e-05 4.69e-05 6.14e-05 oneAPI (I1) 3.00e-04 2.90e-05 4.13e-05 5.41e-05 8.37e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.60e-04 1.97e-05 5.56e-05 3.25e-05 6.28e-05 chained hs52-20 20 11 26 39 CPU (C3) 5.00e-08 7.00e-08 6.00e-08 4.00e-08 1.10e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.60e-07 3.60e-07 3.10e-07 5.40e-07 7.10e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.70e-07 3.90e-07 2.80e-07 5.30e-07 7.40e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 1.70e-07 4.30e-07 3.10e-07 5.30e-07 8.60e-07 CUDA (N1) 3.78e-05 1.59e-05 1.72e-05 1.84e-05 2.65e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.00e-05 3.61e-05 3.42e-05 4.12e-05 7.03e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.21e-05 2.42e-05 2.50e-05 3.03e-05 6.53e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.81e-05 1.71e-05 1.76e-05 2.08e-05 4.61e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.94e-05 2.08e-05 1.95e-05 2.56e-05 5.33e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.15e-05 3.64e-05 4.59e-05 4.93e-05 6.51e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.08e-04 2.79e-05 4.85e-05 5.50e-05 8.18e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.93e-04 1.97e-05 2.57e-05 2.52e-05 5.02e-05 chained hs52-2000 2k 1k 3k 5k CPU (C3) 2.59e-06 1.09e-06 4.70e-06 1.62e-06 8.90e-06 CPU-4T (C3) 2.39e-06 1.69e-06 2.26e-05 2.20e-06 7.70e-06 

CPU-8T (C3) 2.34e-06 1.71e-06 2.30e-05 2.21e-06 7.83e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 2.34e-06 1.75e-06 1.36e-05 2.19e-06 7.86e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.30e-05 1.76e-05 2.15e-05 2.30e-05 3.48e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.41e-05 3.34e-05 3.42e-05 4.05e-05 7.75e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.66e-05 2.96e-05 2.69e-05 3.50e-05 5.78e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.56e-05 1.94e-05 1.83e-05 2.43e-05 3.95e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.27e-05 2.06e-05 2.03e-05 2.64e-05 4.84e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.47e-05 3.46e-05 4.51e-05 4.74e-05 6.24e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.13e-04 3.39e-05 4.01e-05 5.39e-05 9.07e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.85e-04 1.84e-05 2.55e-05 2.91e-05 4.01e-05 chained hs52-200000 200k 150k 350k 500k CPU (C3) 2.58e-04 1.11e-04 4.81e-04 1.67e-04 9.20e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 2.42e-04 6.82e-05 1.02e-03 2.31e-04 4.06e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 2.00e-04 5.75e-05 7.36e-04 2.48e-04 3.66e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.45e-04 1.31e-04 8.97e-04 2.63e-04 4.49e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.70e-05 1.91e-05 2.21e-05 2.35e-05 3.53e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.32e-05 2.67e-05 2.88e-05 3.97e-05 6.94e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.51e-05 2.27e-05 2.51e-05 2.98e-05 5.20e-05 CUDA (N4) 4.68e-05 1.67e-05 1.81e-05 2.14e-05 3.75e-05 CUDA (N6) 5.86e-05 2.54e-05 2.93e-05 3.08e-05 5.14e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 8.26e-05 3.57e-05 4.55e-05 4.81e-05 6.33e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.50e-04 2.73e-05 3.93e-05 5.38e-05 8.60e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.54e-04 1.96e-05 5.56e-05 3.25e-05 6.30e-05 chained hs53-20 20 11 26 39 CPU (C3) 5.00e-08 6.00e-08 6.00e-08 4.00e-08 1.00e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.50e-07 3.70e-07 3.00e-07 5.40e-07 7.10e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.80e-07 3.80e-07 2.90e-07 5.20e-07 7.30e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 1.60e-07 4.20e-07 2.90e-07 5.20e-07 8.50e-07 CUDA (N1) 3.74e-05 1.38e-05 1.68e-05 1.84e-05 2.61e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.50e-05 2.88e-05 3.12e-05 3.87e-05 6.41e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.96e-05 2.60e-05 2.93e-05 3.17e-05 5.81e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.53e-05 1.71e-05 1.91e-05 2.28e-05 3.73e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.64e-05 2.04e-05 2.47e-05 2.71e-05 4.72e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.21e-05 3.71e-05 4.77e-05 5.08e-05 6.60e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.07e-04 2.79e-05 3.99e-05 5.26e-05 8.03e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.19e-04 1.84e-05 2.20e-05 2.54e-05 3.43e-05 chained hs53-2000 2k 1k 3k 5k CPU (C3) 2.59e-06 1.07e-06 4.49e-06 1.61e-06 8.66e-06 CPU-4T (C3) 2.26e-06 1.71e-06 2.27e-05 2.20e-06 7.54e-06 

72 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CPU-8T (C3) 2.29e-06 1.75e-06 2.17e-05 2.20e-06 7.65e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 2.29e-06 1.78e-06 1.30e-05 2.23e-06 7.80e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.11e-05 1.73e-05 2.07e-05 2.46e-05 3.34e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.12e-05 3.74e-05 4.05e-05 4.26e-05 6.99e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.76e-05 3.00e-05 2.72e-05 3.21e-05 6.83e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.72e-05 2.11e-05 1.94e-05 2.18e-05 4.90e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.66e-05 2.47e-05 2.45e-05 2.71e-05 5.42e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.68e-05 3.48e-05 4.38e-05 4.68e-05 6.17e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.23e-04 2.96e-05 4.13e-05 5.57e-05 8.34e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.24e-04 1.93e-05 2.34e-05 2.81e-05 3.49e-05 chained hs53-200000 200k 150k 350k 500k CPU (C3) 2.57e-04 1.12e-04 4.49e-04 1.67e-04 8.92e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 2.39e-04 7.05e-05 1.01e-03 2.32e-04 3.98e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 2.03e-04 5.98e-05 6.09e-04 2.48e-04 3.64e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.44e-04 1.34e-04 9.56e-04 2.90e-04 4.55e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.34e-05 1.70e-05 2.09e-05 2.26e-05 3.20e-05 

CUDA (N2) 6.00e-05 3.35e-05 3.75e-05 4.08e-05 7.30e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.21e-05 3.02e-05 2.66e-05 3.57e-05 5.65e-05 CUDA (N4) 4.41e-05 2.21e-05 1.90e-05 2.61e-05 4.07e-05 CUDA (N6) 5.37e-05 2.36e-05 2.08e-05 2.80e-05 5.04e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 8.28e-05 3.74e-05 4.74e-05 5.03e-05 6.68e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.42e-04 3.69e-05 3.98e-05 5.38e-05 8.34e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.48e-04 1.87e-05 5.56e-05 3.27e-05 6.23e-05 chained powell-20 20 2 4 79 CPU (C3) 1.00e-07 6.00e-08 1.40e-07 7.00e-08 3.00e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.10e-07 2.70e-07 3.90e-07 3.40e-07 7.40e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 2.10e-07 2.60e-07 3.60e-07 3.50e-07 7.40e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 2.00e-07 2.60e-07 3.80e-07 3.60e-07 7.70e-07 CUDA (N1) 4.78e-05 1.39e-05 2.71e-05 2.10e-05 2.84e-05 CUDA (N2) 3.87e-05 1.46e-05 2.75e-05 2.12e-05 3.15e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.39e-05 1.28e-05 2.45e-05 1.88e-05 2.79e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.20e-05 9.19e-06 1.72e-05 1.33e-05 1.99e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.67e-05 1.47e-05 2.62e-05 2.15e-05 2.82e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.16e-05 2.48e-05 4.74e-05 3.64e-05 5.15e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.16e-04 1.94e-05 4.05e-05 3.94e-05 6.51e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.93e-04 1.35e-05 2.29e-05 1.96e-05 2.88e-05 chained powell-2000 2k 2 4 8k CPU (C3) 7.34e-06 7.00e-08 1.31e-05 7.00e-08 2.41e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 7.29e-06 2.70e-07 3.44e-05 3.30e-07 2.03e-05 

CPU-8T (C3) 7.30e-06 2.60e-07 3.38e-05 3.40e-07 2.04e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 7.30e-06 2.60e-07 2.00e-05 3.50e-07 2.03e-05 

CUDA (N1) 5.98e-05 1.54e-05 2.14e-05 1.47e-05 2.32e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.71e-05 1.56e-05 2.98e-05 2.30e-05 3.44e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.32e-05 1.53e-05 2.96e-05 2.01e-05 3.53e-05 CUDA (N4) 5.76e-05 9.73e-06 1.90e-05 1.41e-05 2.40e-05 CUDA (N6) 6.98e-05 1.24e-05 2.45e-05 1.84e-05 2.80e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.70e-05 2.38e-05 4.67e-05 3.55e-05 4.97e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.15e-04 1.97e-05 3.87e-05 3.83e-05 5.65e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.00e-04 1.40e-05 2.47e-05 1.99e-05 3.10e-05 chained powell-200000 200k 2 4 800k CPU (C3) 7.37e-04 7.00e-08 1.70e-03 6.00e-08 3.25e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 8.06e-04 2.70e-07 2.00e-03 3.30e-07 7.69e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.40e-04 2.60e-07 1.58e-03 3.30e-07 5.36e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 2.66e-04 2.60e-07 1.65e-03 3.50e-07 5.10e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.82e-05 8.98e-06 1.73e-05 1.50e-05 2.63e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.60e-05 1.58e-05 3.52e-05 2.22e-05 4.37e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.64e-05 1.29e-05 2.42e-05 1.87e-05 3.29e-05 CUDA (N4) 5.73e-05 9.26e-06 2.47e-05 1.35e-05 4.32e-05 CUDA (N6) 6.93e-05 1.15e-05 2.24e-05 1.48e-05 3.53e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 1.02e-04 2.41e-05 4.78e-05 3.65e-05 5.09e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.59e-04 1.98e-05 4.05e-05 3.93e-05 8.04e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.72e-04 1.34e-05 8.41e-05 1.99e-05 1.23e-04 cragg levy-20 20 18 54 135 CPU (C3) 2.60e-07 6.00e-08 3.30e-07 1.30e-07 7.50e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.60e-07 1.80e-07 5.80e-07 2.30e-07 1.01e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 3.60e-07 1.50e-07 5.70e-07 2.20e-07 9.70e-07 

73 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CPU-16T (C3) 3.60e-07 1.40e-07 5.90e-07 2.20e-07 1.00e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.42e-05 5.53e-06 2.33e-05 1.20e-05 1.69e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.38e-05 7.57e-06 2.99e-05 1.46e-05 2.50e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.61e-05 7.17e-06 2.61e-05 1.24e-05 2.13e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.60e-05 4.61e-06 1.74e-05 8.53e-06 2.11e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.07e-05 5.15e-06 2.27e-05 9.40e-06 3.11e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.81e-05 1.18e-05 4.64e-05 2.35e-05 3.64e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.17e-04 9.43e-06 3.96e-05 2.24e-05 4.44e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.90e-04 6.45e-06 2.30e-05 1.23e-05 2.11e-05 cragg levy-2000 2k 2k 6k 15k CPU (C3) 2.60e-05 2.13e-06 3.53e-05 1.25e-05 8.28e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 2.47e-05 5.07e-06 5.49e-05 1.45e-05 8.01e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 2.48e-05 5.12e-06 5.56e-05 1.51e-05 7.77e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.48e-05 2.95e-06 4.44e-05 1.07e-05 7.39e-05 CUDA (N1) 6.08e-05 7.69e-06 2.86e-05 1.40e-05 2.46e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.44e-05 7.28e-06 2.96e-05 1.37e-05 4.28e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.70e-05 6.51e-06 2.57e-05 1.22e-05 2.77e-05 CUDA (N4) 9.66e-05 4.76e-06 1.17e-04 8.82e-06 1.99e-04 CUDA (N6) 1.14e-04 6.64e-06 1.02e-04 1.42e-05 1.80e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.07e-05 1.21e-05 4.75e-05 2.37e-05 3.72e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.19e-04 9.55e-06 4.10e-05 2.24e-05 4.50e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.96e-04 6.35e-06 2.36e-05 1.29e-05 3.11e-05 cragg levy-200000 200k 200k 600k 1.5M CPU (C3) 2.61e-03 2.14e-04 3.55e-03 1.28e-03 8.38e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.20e-03 3.25e-05 2.98e-03 3.63e-04 2.43e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 6.26e-04 2.50e-05 1.97e-03 3.30e-04 1.50e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 3.57e-04 4.18e-05 1.74e-03 3.69e-04 1.21e-03 CUDA (N1) 4.86e-05 4.79e-06 2.29e-05 9.72e-06 3.93e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.74e-05 8.49e-06 4.96e-05 2.40e-05 1.01e-04 CUDA (N3) 5.41e-05 7.55e-06 2.95e-05 1.63e-05 5.10e-05 CUDA (N4) 9.85e-05 7.38e-06 1.24e-04 1.88e-05 2.19e-04 CUDA (N6) 1.15e-04 7.01e-06 1.09e-04 1.22e-05 1.98e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 1.03e-04 1.20e-05 4.71e-05 2.41e-05 4.80e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.84e-04 9.81e-06 4.48e-05 3.00e-05 1.12e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.69e-04 1.38e-05 8.94e-05 5.05e-05 1.80e-04 generalized brown-20 20 18 54 58 CPU (C3) 7.00e-08 6.00e-08 2.30e-07 1.00e-07 5.80e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.80e-07 2.10e-07 4.50e-07 2.00e-07 8.30e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 2.20e-07 1.50e-07 4.50e-07 2.00e-07 8.20e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 1.80e-07 1.60e-07 4.60e-07 2.10e-07 8.30e-07 CUDA (N1) 3.75e-05 4.39e-06 1.63e-05 9.15e-06 1.39e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.30e-05 7.72e-06 2.92e-05 1.48e-05 2.50e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.71e-05 7.31e-06 2.81e-05 1.40e-05 2.25e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.33e-05 4.76e-06 1.77e-05 9.10e-06 2.89e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.59e-05 6.35e-06 2.31e-05 1.07e-05 4.69e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.20e-05 1.20e-05 4.68e-05 2.40e-05 3.66e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.14e-04 8.92e-06 3.70e-05 2.19e-05 3.95e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.94e-04 9.01e-06 2.52e-05 1.19e-05 2.24e-05 generalized brown-2000 2k 2k 6k 6k CPU (C3) 5.15e-06 1.63e-06 2.04e-05 9.02e-06 5.95e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 3.85e-06 5.12e-06 3.46e-05 1.24e-05 5.55e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 3.83e-06 5.79e-06 3.36e-05 1.30e-05 5.59e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 3.78e-06 3.67e-06 2.69e-05 8.58e-06 5.68e-05 CUDA (N1) 5.21e-05 5.55e-06 2.30e-05 1.14e-05 1.73e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.42e-05 7.69e-06 2.79e-05 1.41e-05 3.01e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.69e-05 6.43e-06 2.58e-05 1.25e-05 2.05e-05 CUDA (N4) 5.17e-05 4.83e-06 8.76e-05 9.26e-06 1.82e-04 CUDA (N6) 6.85e-05 5.63e-06 9.29e-05 1.15e-05 1.97e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.58e-05 1.19e-05 4.63e-05 2.35e-05 3.67e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.15e-04 9.29e-06 4.47e-05 2.46e-05 4.06e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.23e-04 6.95e-06 2.31e-05 1.18e-05 1.99e-05 generalized brown-200000 200k 200k 600k 600k CPU (C3) 5.15e-04 1.63e-04 2.06e-03 1.07e-03 6.02e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 4.78e-04 2.51e-05 1.23e-03 3.52e-04 1.88e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 4.18e-04 2.04e-05 7.61e-04 3.62e-04 8.83e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 2.50e-04 4.06e-05 9.08e-04 2.94e-04 6.36e-04 

74 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N1) 5.44e-05 6.01e-06 2.20e-05 1.07e-05 3.48e-05 

CUDA (N2) 6.05e-05 8.55e-06 3.34e-05 1.87e-05 5.90e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.70e-05 6.62e-06 2.54e-05 1.24e-05 3.55e-05 CUDA (N4) 7.98e-05 5.92e-06 1.70e-04 1.37e-05 3.61e-04 CUDA (N6) 6.77e-05 5.33e-06 9.27e-05 1.00e-05 3.83e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 9.58e-05 1.24e-05 4.77e-05 2.45e-05 3.73e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.67e-04 9.14e-06 4.40e-05 2.19e-05 6.00e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.53e-04 1.14e-05 4.60e-05 5.00e-05 7.84e-05 modified brown-20 20 6 30 61 CPU (C3) 9.00e-08 7.00e-08 1.10e-07 7.00e-08 2.10e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.80e-07 1.43e-06 3.40e-07 1.69e-06 2.10e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.90e-07 1.35e-06 3.50e-07 1.65e-06 2.00e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.90e-07 1.40e-06 3.30e-07 1.63e-06 2.03e-06 CUDA (N1) 3.76e-05 3.53e-05 1.74e-05 4.00e-05 4.67e-05 CUDA (N2) 3.96e-05 5.97e-05 2.85e-05 7.83e-05 9.68e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.41e-05 4.88e-05 2.43e-05 5.77e-05 7.38e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.19e-05 3.39e-05 1.71e-05 4.12e-05 5.29e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.34e-05 4.37e-05 2.12e-05 5.19e-05 6.12e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.08e-05 7.63e-05 4.57e-05 9.17e-05 1.08e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.09e-04 7.21e-05 4.26e-05 1.25e-04 1.46e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.09e-04 1.49e-04 3.62e-05 1.48e-04 6.82e-05 modified brown-2000 2k 6 30 3k CPU (C3) 6.57e-06 7.00e-08 8.20e-06 7.00e-08 1.36e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 4.92e-06 1.44e-06 2.26e-05 1.68e-06 1.23e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 4.71e-06 1.37e-06 2.15e-05 1.67e-06 1.24e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 4.73e-06 1.39e-06 2.07e-05 1.64e-06 1.21e-05 

CUDA (N1) 5.28e-05 4.07e-05 2.16e-05 4.64e-05 5.45e-05 CUDA (N2) 6.00e-05 6.39e-05 3.11e-05 7.67e-05 9.72e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.61e-05 4.83e-05 2.49e-05 5.86e-05 7.32e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.99e-05 3.49e-05 1.80e-05 4.21e-05 5.27e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.22e-05 3.83e-05 1.97e-05 4.70e-05 5.76e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.61e-05 7.64e-05 4.62e-05 9.14e-05 1.08e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.38e-04 6.85e-05 3.81e-05 1.20e-04 1.43e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.49e-04 4.93e-05 2.20e-05 5.40e-05 7.51e-05 modified brown-200000 200k 6 30 300k CPU (C3) 6.56e-04 7.00e-08 8.24e-04 7.00e-08 1.37e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 4.65e-04 1.43e-06 9.20e-04 1.69e-06 3.67e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.09e-04 1.37e-06 6.27e-04 1.67e-06 2.51e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 2.48e-04 1.40e-06 7.03e-04 1.63e-06 2.36e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.66e-05 5.16e-05 2.88e-05 5.83e-05 6.93e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.53e-05 5.71e-05 2.88e-05 6.88e-05 8.73e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.66e-05 4.79e-05 2.46e-05 5.73e-05 7.27e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.00e-05 3.38e-05 1.79e-05 4.02e-05 5.13e-05 

CUDA (N6) 4.66e-05 5.18e-05 2.61e-05 5.76e-05 6.92e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 9.95e-05 7.78e-05 4.71e-05 9.32e-05 1.09e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.57e-04 6.81e-05 3.66e-05 1.18e-04 1.41e-04 Metal (M1 *) 4.55e-04 4.83e-05 4.46e-05 5.49e-05 6.86e-05 rosenrock-20 20 18 54 165 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.90e-07 7.00e-08 5.90e-07 1.04e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.50e-07 3.70e-07 3.00e-07 6.50e-07 1.27e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.40e-07 3.80e-07 3.00e-07 6.60e-07 1.23e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.70e-07 3.70e-07 3.00e-07 6.70e-07 1.26e-06 CUDA (N1) 3.89e-05 4.49e-06 1.87e-05 8.71e-06 1.44e-05 CUDA (N2) 3.84e-05 7.51e-06 2.69e-05 1.37e-05 2.25e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.39e-05 6.55e-06 2.42e-05 1.21e-05 1.97e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.17e-05 4.61e-06 1.71e-05 8.67e-06 1.42e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.05e-05 6.01e-06 2.15e-05 1.09e-05 1.72e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.05e-05 1.18e-05 4.50e-05 2.30e-05 3.55e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.07e-04 1.53e-05 3.72e-05 2.60e-05 4.32e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.90e-04 6.76e-06 2.24e-05 1.26e-05 2.07e-05 rosenrock-2000 2k 2k 6k 18k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.72e-05 5.31e-06 6.19e-05 1.14e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 1.16e-05 2.19e-05 2.59e-05 4.03e-05 7.89e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 5.24e-06 1.97e-05 1.89e-05 3.38e-05 7.08e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.26e-05 2.32e-05 3.36e-05 4.02e-05 8.60e-05 CUDA (N1) 5.08e-05 6.51e-06 2.33e-05 1.29e-05 1.90e-05 

75 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N2) 5.79e-05 8.12e-06 3.08e-05 1.53e-05 3.05e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.54e-05 6.66e-06 2.43e-05 1.30e-05 2.29e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.98e-05 1.48e-05 1.79e-05 2.04e-05 5.42e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.23e-05 1.48e-05 1.99e-05 2.07e-05 5.52e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.46e-05 1.19e-05 4.54e-05 2.33e-05 3.59e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.09e-04 1.15e-05 3.61e-05 2.58e-05 4.24e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.91e-04 6.75e-06 2.28e-05 1.33e-05 2.83e-05 rosenrock-200000 200k 200k 600k 1.8M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.74e-03 5.64e-04 6.29e-03 1.16e-02 CPU-4T (C3) 3.49e-04 6.59e-04 1.79e-03 1.59e-03 3.21e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 2.19e-04 3.44e-04 1.44e-03 8.86e-04 1.85e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 1.51e-04 1.96e-04 6.32e-04 5.69e-04 1.25e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.32e-05 8.06e-06 2.83e-05 1.63e-05 3.39e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.53e-05 7.44e-06 2.73e-05 3.61e-05 9.69e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.69e-05 6.89e-06 2.44e-05 2.46e-05 6.31e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.13e-05 2.80e-05 1.77e-05 6.11e-05 1.25e-04 CUDA (N6) 4.78e-05 2.90e-05 2.89e-05 4.11e-05 1.18e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 1.00e-04 1.15e-05 4.43e-05 2.26e-05 4.81e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.85e-04 1.09e-05 3.51e-05 4.53e-05 1.58e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.58e-04 2.85e-05 6.33e-05 7.54e-05 2.48e-04 trigo tridiagonal-20 20 4 14 69 CPU (C3) 2.40e-07 5.00e-08 4.60e-07 6.00e-08 6.90e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.60e-07 4.90e-07 7.00e-07 6.70e-07 1.55e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 3.50e-07 4.80e-07 7.40e-07 6.60e-07 1.44e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 3.50e-07 5.60e-07 7.00e-07 6.80e-07 1.46e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.81e-05 3.07e-05 2.45e-05 3.79e-05 4.64e-05 CUDA (N2) 3.99e-05 3.01e-05 2.73e-05 3.76e-05 5.32e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.38e-05 2.58e-05 2.45e-05 3.32e-05 4.55e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.17e-05 1.83e-05 1.70e-05 2.34e-05 3.22e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.60e-05 3.00e-05 2.81e-05 3.68e-05 4.89e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.13e-05 4.93e-05 4.81e-05 6.43e-05 7.72e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.10e-04 4.18e-05 3.90e-05 7.48e-05 9.97e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.00e-04 3.70e-05 2.50e-05 5.55e-05 5.68e-05 trigo tridiagonal-2000 2k 4 14 6k CPU (C3) 2.39e-05 5.00e-08 4.88e-05 6.00e-08 7.06e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 3.32e-05 4.90e-07 4.91e-05 6.80e-07 4.73e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 3.14e-05 4.80e-07 5.10e-05 6.50e-07 4.51e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 3.01e-05 5.60e-07 4.27e-05 6.60e-07 4.34e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.58e-05 1.93e-05 1.68e-05 2.30e-05 3.37e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.78e-05 3.25e-05 2.94e-05 3.94e-05 6.00e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.98e-05 3.20e-05 2.85e-05 3.79e-05 5.24e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.52e-05 2.00e-05 1.86e-05 2.46e-05 3.45e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.80e-05 2.66e-05 2.45e-05 3.26e-05 4.41e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.58e-05 4.70e-05 4.52e-05 6.02e-05 7.43e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.64e-04 4.47e-05 3.37e-05 7.28e-05 9.11e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.16e-04 3.45e-05 2.58e-05 4.10e-05 5.85e-05 trigo tridiagonal-200000 200k 4 14 600k CPU (C3) 2.40e-03 5.00e-08 4.92e-03 6.00e-08 7.12e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.24e-03 4.80e-07 3.26e-03 6.80e-07 1.88e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 9.70e-04 4.90e-07 2.98e-03 6.50e-07 1.08e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 5.44e-04 5.70e-07 2.25e-03 6.70e-07 6.69e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.54e-05 2.47e-05 2.00e-05 2.92e-05 3.70e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.37e-05 3.08e-05 2.97e-05 4.00e-05 5.80e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.72e-05 2.76e-05 2.46e-05 3.36e-05 4.75e-05 CUDA (N4) 4.83e-05 1.98e-05 3.53e-05 2.46e-05 6.91e-05 CUDA (N6) 5.81e-05 2.30e-05 3.34e-05 2.94e-05 4.90e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 8.37e-05 4.92e-05 4.71e-05 6.21e-05 7.60e-05 oneAPI (I1) 3.17e-04 5.13e-05 3.64e-05 7.72e-05 9.38e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.72e-04 3.37e-05 1.09e-04 4.06e-05 7.51e-05 wood-20 20 13 39 102 CPU (C3) 7.00e-08 6.00e-08 1.00e-07 1.00e-07 3.00e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.90e-07 4.00e-07 3.90e-07 3.60e-07 8.10e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.90e-07 3.90e-07 3.70e-07 3.50e-07 8.30e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 1.90e-07 4.40e-07 3.60e-07 3.40e-07 8.20e-07 CUDA (N1) 3.75e-05 1.29e-05 1.66e-05 1.36e-05 1.94e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.19e-05 2.43e-05 2.96e-05 2.28e-05 3.35e-05 

76 Table 8: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N3) 3.37e-05 1.99e-05 2.48e-05 1.89e-05 2.78e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.36e-05 1.49e-05 1.85e-05 1.40e-05 2.07e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.58e-05 1.90e-05 2.38e-05 1.75e-05 2.64e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.13e-05 3.64e-05 4.74e-05 3.66e-05 5.02e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.16e-04 3.16e-05 4.12e-05 3.74e-05 6.04e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.83e-04 1.85e-05 2.30e-05 1.94e-05 2.81e-05 wood-2000 2k 2k 6k 13k CPU (C3) 3.23e-06 2.62e-06 8.70e-06 1.13e-05 3.73e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 3.82e-06 2.37e-05 3.29e-05 2.26e-05 4.64e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 3.82e-06 2.77e-05 3.34e-05 2.13e-05 4.69e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 3.81e-06 1.32e-05 1.87e-05 1.08e-05 4.05e-05 CUDA (N1) 5.33e-05 1.74e-05 2.11e-05 1.78e-05 2.30e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.65e-05 2.45e-05 3.04e-05 2.25e-05 3.47e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.67e-05 2.00e-05 2.57e-05 1.90e-05 2.88e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.28e-05 1.50e-05 1.82e-05 1.42e-05 3.40e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.29e-05 1.87e-05 2.25e-05 1.73e-05 4.13e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.42e-05 3.35e-05 4.36e-05 3.37e-05 4.69e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.32e-04 3.24e-05 4.66e-05 4.11e-05 6.47e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.05e-04 1.90e-05 2.40e-05 1.95e-05 3.79e-05 wood-200000 200k 200k 600k 1.3M CPU (C3) 3.21e-04 2.63e-04 9.09e-04 1.14e-03 3.81e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 2.48e-04 1.44e-04 1.93e-03 3.81e-04 1.25e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.40e-04 1.32e-04 1.39e-03 3.96e-04 8.72e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 9.97e-05 1.98e-04 1.50e-03 3.97e-04 8.66e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.44e-05 1.61e-05 2.23e-05 1.61e-05 3.29e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.95e-05 2.49e-05 4.01e-05 2.47e-05 6.23e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.67e-05 2.04e-05 2.56e-05 1.90e-05 4.23e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.40e-05 1.47e-05 3.02e-05 1.76e-05 6.87e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.30e-05 1.62e-05 2.21e-05 1.54e-05 5.75e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 9.75e-05 3.62e-05 4.77e-05 3.68e-05 5.11e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.48e-04 3.56e-05 4.30e-05 3.70e-05 9.67e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.66e-04 3.81e-05 9.25e-05 5.37e-05 1.75e-04 

Table 9: Per-instance callback times (seconds) for the COPS benchmark suite. 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

bearing-(5, 5) 49 28 28 360 CPU (C3) 1.84e-06 6.00e-08 2.07e-06 3.00e-08 2.24e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.19e-06 5.80e-07 2.44e-06 6.40e-07 3.30e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 2.11e-06 5.40e-07 2.47e-06 6.90e-07 3.30e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 2.18e-06 5.90e-07 2.52e-06 6.80e-07 3.05e-06 CUDA (N1) 5.38e-05 2.17e-05 3.33e-05 2.51e-05 4.76e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.93e-05 2.80e-05 6.43e-05 3.70e-05 8.35e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.35e-05 2.62e-05 4.31e-05 3.59e-05 6.53e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.40e-05 1.79e-05 3.02e-05 2.44e-05 4.57e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.81e-05 2.25e-05 3.73e-05 3.02e-05 5.67e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 7.74e-05 4.90e-05 7.64e-05 5.95e-05 1.04e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.47e-04 3.87e-05 6.64e-05 9.70e-05 1.24e-04 Metal (M1 *) 5.11e-04 3.01e-05 4.70e-05 3.10e-05 6.22e-05 bearing-(35, 35) 1k 148 148 13k CPU (C3) 5.82e-05 1.20e-07 6.56e-05 6.00e-08 7.21e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 9.50e-05 6.20e-07 9.48e-05 6.60e-07 8.08e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 9.89e-05 6.20e-07 1.03e-04 7.10e-07 8.19e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 7.31e-05 6.50e-07 8.42e-05 6.90e-07 7.17e-05 CUDA (N1) 6.88e-05 2.48e-05 3.82e-05 2.92e-05 5.69e-05 CUDA (N2) 8.49e-05 3.11e-05 5.55e-05 4.67e-05 8.54e-05 CUDA (N3) 6.76e-05 2.52e-05 4.47e-05 4.08e-05 7.32e-05 CUDA (N4) 6.76e-05 1.85e-05 5.83e-05 2.84e-05 5.47e-05 

CUDA (N6) 7.66e-05 1.98e-05 5.82e-05 3.06e-05 5.54e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 9.72e-05 4.75e-05 7.64e-05 6.10e-05 1.04e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.52e-04 3.89e-05 6.83e-05 6.97e-05 1.53e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.56e-04 2.45e-05 4.48e-05 3.36e-05 6.11e-05 bearing-(320, 320) 104k 1k 1k 1.0M CPU (C3) 4.41e-03 7.60e-07 4.74e-03 4.20e-07 5.20e-03 

77 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.93e-03 1.25e-06 3.55e-03 1.01e-06 1.57e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.48e-03 1.23e-06 3.19e-03 1.05e-06 9.67e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 8.92e-04 1.31e-06 3.17e-03 1.03e-06 7.82e-04 CUDA (N1) 7.26e-05 2.35e-05 3.79e-05 3.10e-05 6.02e-05 

CUDA (N2) 9.65e-05 4.45e-05 8.94e-05 6.60e-05 1.48e-04 CUDA (N3) 9.91e-05 3.48e-05 6.41e-05 4.66e-05 9.89e-05 CUDA (N4) 7.65e-05 2.48e-05 6.96e-05 3.25e-05 9.89e-05 CUDA (N6) 9.41e-05 3.64e-05 6.45e-05 4.80e-05 1.00e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 1.29e-04 4.57e-05 7.21e-05 6.09e-05 1.07e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.79e-04 4.06e-05 6.95e-05 7.23e-05 1.43e-04 Metal (M1 *) 4.64e-04 2.51e-05 1.89e-04 3.18e-05 1.20e-04 camshape-20 20 43 100 115 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 9.00e-08 2.00e-08 1.70e-07 1.80e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.40e-07 2.79e-06 3.20e-07 3.03e-06 2.90e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.40e-07 2.50e-06 3.10e-07 3.80e-06 3.74e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 2.30e-07 2.96e-06 2.70e-07 3.16e-06 3.95e-06 CUDA (N1) 3.74e-05 4.55e-05 1.60e-05 5.03e-05 6.35e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.38e-05 1.38e-04 3.09e-05 1.59e-04 2.18e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.90e-05 1.29e-04 3.13e-05 1.35e-04 2.31e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.42e-05 8.76e-05 2.02e-05 8.97e-05 1.57e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.58e-05 1.21e-04 2.63e-05 1.27e-04 2.41e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.21e-05 1.09e-04 4.73e-05 1.25e-04 1.48e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.09e-04 9.80e-05 3.87e-05 1.68e-04 2.08e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.94e-04 5.75e-05 2.91e-05 6.46e-05 7.66e-05 camshape-2000 2k 4k 10k 12k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.10e-06 2.70e-07 1.34e-05 1.68e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.24e-05 1.71e-05 2.01e-05 2.97e-05 3.33e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.22e-05 1.74e-05 2.24e-05 3.12e-05 3.56e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 5.33e-06 1.29e-05 1.64e-05 2.37e-05 2.98e-05 CUDA (N1) 5.12e-05 5.23e-05 1.97e-05 6.09e-05 7.47e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.27e-05 6.18e-05 2.65e-05 7.20e-05 8.85e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.62e-05 5.36e-05 2.39e-05 6.35e-05 7.83e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.02e-05 3.85e-05 1.73e-05 4.49e-05 5.53e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.21e-05 4.68e-05 1.93e-05 5.47e-05 6.44e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.55e-05 1.01e-04 4.38e-05 1.18e-04 1.40e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.17e-04 9.42e-05 3.74e-05 1.84e-04 2.27e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.28e-04 6.07e-05 2.20e-05 6.97e-05 7.28e-05 camshape-170000 170k 340k 850k 1.0M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.61e-04 2.81e-05 1.17e-03 1.61e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.91e-04 7.05e-05 5.21e-04 5.26e-04 6.24e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.76e-04 5.68e-05 3.46e-04 5.48e-04 6.52e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.39e-04 9.42e-05 6.43e-04 5.27e-04 7.03e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.27e-05 5.17e-05 2.15e-05 6.46e-05 7.62e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.65e-05 6.82e-05 2.88e-05 7.89e-05 9.75e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.72e-05 5.46e-05 2.41e-05 6.85e-05 8.24e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.19e-05 3.93e-05 1.77e-05 4.54e-05 5.60e-05 

CUDA (N6) 4.37e-05 4.32e-05 1.96e-05 5.00e-05 6.18e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 9.89e-05 1.06e-04 4.69e-05 1.25e-04 1.47e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.85e-04 8.90e-05 3.53e-05 1.82e-04 2.17e-04 Metal (M1 *) 4.84e-04 5.60e-05 3.16e-05 8.52e-05 1.53e-04 catmix-3 71 62 266 144 CPU (C3) 4.00e-08 8.50e-07 5.00e-08 1.04e-06 8.10e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 4.10e-07 2.83e-06 6.50e-07 3.22e-06 3.76e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 2.80e-07 2.90e-06 4.40e-07 3.21e-06 4.30e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 5.60e-07 3.16e-06 7.00e-07 3.19e-06 4.34e-06 CUDA (N1) 5.03e-05 5.29e-05 2.84e-05 6.50e-05 8.04e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.97e-05 6.57e-05 3.61e-05 7.52e-05 1.02e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.13e-05 5.77e-05 3.14e-05 6.68e-05 9.01e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.68e-05 3.94e-05 2.19e-05 4.75e-05 6.34e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.54e-05 6.16e-05 3.50e-05 6.90e-05 9.04e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.64e-05 9.97e-05 5.87e-05 1.16e-04 1.54e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.21e-04 8.85e-05 4.64e-05 1.69e-04 2.29e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.09e-04 5.63e-05 2.98e-05 6.43e-05 8.25e-05 catmix-200 5k 4k 18k 10k CPU (C3) 1.12e-06 5.02e-05 1.56e-06 6.75e-05 5.36e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.15e-06 6.04e-05 3.80e-06 6.76e-05 6.50e-05 

78 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CPU-8T (C3) 1.00e-06 6.18e-05 3.48e-06 7.02e-05 6.42e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.29e-06 5.41e-05 3.71e-06 5.42e-05 5.71e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.56e-05 5.21e-05 2.34e-05 5.86e-05 7.55e-05 CUDA (N2) 6.85e-05 1.91e-04 3.98e-05 8.69e-05 1.09e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.72e-05 6.50e-05 3.56e-05 8.00e-05 1.00e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.99e-05 4.32e-05 2.41e-05 5.08e-05 6.84e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.49e-05 6.11e-05 3.06e-05 6.11e-05 8.30e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 7.94e-05 9.55e-05 5.66e-05 1.10e-04 1.43e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.35e-04 8.46e-05 4.67e-05 1.66e-04 2.16e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.69e-04 7.29e-05 3.01e-05 8.91e-05 8.50e-05 catmix-20000 460k 400k 1.8M 1.0M CPU (C3) 1.10e-04 5.09e-03 1.58e-04 6.86e-03 5.40e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.15e-04 1.25e-03 2.76e-04 1.84e-03 1.66e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.02e-04 6.87e-04 2.65e-04 1.26e-03 1.09e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 7.72e-05 4.75e-04 4.01e-04 1.09e-03 9.31e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.66e-05 7.30e-05 2.75e-05 8.31e-05 1.26e-04 

CUDA (N2) 6.27e-05 1.91e-04 3.72e-05 2.28e-04 2.44e-04 CUDA (N3) 5.72e-05 1.14e-04 3.10e-05 1.46e-04 1.44e-04 CUDA (N4) 3.62e-05 2.14e-04 2.24e-05 3.44e-04 3.28e-04 CUDA (N6) 4.91e-05 9.85e-05 2.74e-05 1.20e-04 1.28e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 1.04e-04 1.24e-04 6.38e-05 1.36e-04 1.72e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.56e-04 8.51e-05 4.82e-05 1.59e-04 2.10e-04 Metal (M1 *) 4.05e-04 1.45e-04 4.19e-05 1.88e-04 1.37e-04 chain-50 48 38 159 88 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.40e-07 2.00e-08 2.10e-07 2.70e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.60e-07 1.33e-06 2.40e-07 2.36e-06 3.24e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-07 2.17e-06 2.20e-07 2.82e-06 2.46e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 2.20e-07 1.99e-06 2.20e-07 4.16e-06 3.44e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.31e-05 5.61e-05 2.19e-05 7.53e-05 8.95e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.33e-05 6.41e-05 2.99e-05 7.49e-05 9.32e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.40e-05 5.26e-05 2.42e-05 6.48e-05 7.62e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.22e-05 3.68e-05 1.67e-05 4.34e-05 5.33e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.30e-05 4.10e-05 1.86e-05 4.81e-05 5.90e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.82e-05 1.01e-04 4.38e-05 1.23e-04 1.37e-04 oneAPI (I1) 9.54e-05 8.22e-05 3.46e-05 1.50e-04 1.80e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.79e-04 5.42e-05 2.24e-05 6.45e-05 7.60e-05 chain-5000 5k 4k 17k 10k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 9.53e-06 3.40e-07 2.03e-05 2.77e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.70e-07 3.30e-05 5.90e-07 5.46e-05 5.12e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.50e-07 2.69e-05 5.90e-07 4.18e-05 4.07e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.20e-07 2.39e-05 6.10e-07 3.69e-05 3.99e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.91e-05 7.12e-05 3.08e-05 7.70e-05 8.63e-05 CUDA (N2) 3.91e-05 6.24e-05 2.74e-05 7.17e-05 8.79e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.41e-05 5.20e-05 2.39e-05 6.25e-05 7.79e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.19e-05 3.73e-05 1.68e-05 4.43e-05 5.47e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.85e-05 5.95e-05 2.46e-05 6.67e-05 7.91e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.05e-05 9.76e-05 4.44e-05 1.17e-04 1.31e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.13e-04 9.26e-05 4.11e-05 1.54e-04 1.86e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.84e-04 5.43e-05 2.16e-05 6.34e-05 7.33e-05 chain-500000 500k 375k 1.7M 1000k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 9.44e-04 3.72e-05 2.08e-03 2.81e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.70e-07 2.76e-04 3.71e-05 1.12e-03 9.84e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.40e-07 1.58e-04 3.93e-05 9.80e-04 6.64e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 2.30e-07 1.82e-04 3.86e-05 1.15e-03 7.89e-04 CUDA (N1) 3.88e-05 4.44e-05 1.64e-05 4.94e-05 6.37e-05 

CUDA (N2) 4.24e-05 6.45e-05 2.88e-05 7.43e-05 9.37e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.77e-05 5.94e-05 2.73e-05 7.14e-05 8.61e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.34e-05 3.94e-05 1.79e-05 6.43e-05 7.37e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.67e-05 4.86e-05 2.35e-05 5.92e-05 7.04e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.12e-05 1.00e-04 4.43e-05 1.16e-04 1.33e-04 oneAPI (I1) 9.75e-05 8.55e-05 3.70e-05 1.58e-04 1.77e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.74e-04 7.16e-05 2.19e-05 1.58e-04 1.28e-04 channel-5 200 200 2k 120 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.08e-06 2.00e-08 1.53e-06 2.20e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.70e-07 6.11e-06 4.00e-08 5.24e-06 5.60e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 4.60e-07 5.49e-06 4.00e-08 6.60e-06 4.44e-06 

79 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CPU-16T (C3) 4.40e-07 3.85e-06 4.00e-08 5.52e-06 5.63e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.19e-05 6.48e-05 5.55e-06 8.60e-05 8.93e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.00e-05 7.04e-05 5.68e-06 8.24e-05 1.00e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.44e-05 6.12e-05 5.20e-06 7.34e-05 8.47e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.18e-05 4.32e-05 3.44e-06 5.13e-05 6.11e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.30e-05 5.45e-05 4.66e-06 6.25e-05 7.29e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.10e-05 1.18e-04 1.06e-05 1.34e-04 1.53e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.12e-04 1.16e-04 7.70e-06 2.14e-04 2.51e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.08e-04 5.95e-05 4.48e-06 7.13e-05 1.23e-04 channel-400 16k 16k 123k 10k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 8.10e-05 1.00e-06 1.30e-04 1.57e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.60e-07 8.25e-05 1.02e-06 1.23e-04 4.43e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 4.70e-07 7.10e-05 1.02e-06 1.06e-04 4.55e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 4.60e-07 8.18e-05 1.02e-06 8.85e-05 5.71e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.47e-05 6.93e-05 5.20e-06 8.50e-05 8.48e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.19e-05 7.49e-05 6.05e-06 8.72e-05 1.03e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.44e-05 6.35e-05 5.12e-06 7.31e-05 8.65e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.24e-05 4.39e-05 3.77e-06 5.22e-05 6.29e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.25e-05 5.09e-05 4.30e-06 5.79e-05 6.91e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.95e-05 1.19e-04 1.12e-05 1.37e-04 1.55e-04 oneAPI (I1) 9.54e-05 1.18e-04 7.68e-06 2.36e-04 2.51e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.79e-04 7.30e-05 4.53e-06 7.90e-05 8.15e-05 channel-42000 1.7M 1.7M 12.9M 1.0M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 9.90e-03 1.26e-04 1.43e-02 1.72e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 3.60e-07 5.41e-03 1.29e-04 3.33e-03 6.60e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.60e-07 2.78e-03 1.30e-04 2.96e-03 5.87e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 4.50e-07 1.82e-03 1.31e-04 2.78e-03 7.04e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.38e-05 8.90e-05 6.90e-06 1.47e-04 1.13e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.08e-05 1.34e-04 9.06e-06 4.40e-04 9.96e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.48e-05 8.01e-05 5.23e-06 2.87e-04 8.73e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.24e-05 2.56e-04 5.91e-06 7.35e-04 6.28e-05 

CUDA (N6) 3.66e-05 9.21e-05 6.57e-06 3.14e-04 8.63e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.18e-05 1.21e-04 1.08e-05 3.37e-04 1.63e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.79e-03 1.42e-04 1.34e-05 7.08e-04 2.81e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.85e-04 5.66e-04 5.37e-05 1.53e-03 1.14e-04 dirichlet-5 11k 8k 63k 71k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.69e-04 6.90e-07 5.53e-04 6.78e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 1.30e-07 1.72e-04 9.60e-07 1.63e-04 2.09e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 1.58e-04 9.50e-07 1.26e-04 1.50e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.20e-07 1.97e-04 9.60e-07 1.44e-04 1.75e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.01e-05 2.50e-04 1.87e-05 1.02e-04 1.31e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.28e-05 2.96e-04 2.89e-05 9.63e-05 1.12e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.71e-05 2.49e-04 2.74e-05 8.98e-05 1.06e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.33e-05 2.69e-04 1.78e-05 6.08e-05 8.02e-05 

CUDA (N6) 3.77e-05 3.36e-04 2.38e-05 6.82e-05 8.45e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.88e-05 3.45e-04 4.68e-05 1.64e-04 1.82e-04 oneAPI (I1) 9.67e-05 7.16e-04 3.68e-05 2.68e-04 2.86e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.24e-04 3.44e-04 2.09e-05 8.05e-05 1.01e-04 dirichlet-20 33k 24k 197k 227k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 8.67e-04 2.08e-06 1.74e-03 2.14e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.30e-07 4.67e-04 2.36e-06 3.85e-04 5.23e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 4.04e-04 2.36e-06 2.98e-04 3.61e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.30e-07 4.36e-04 2.36e-06 3.99e-04 4.26e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.13e-05 3.84e-04 1.72e-05 6.98e-05 8.04e-05 

CUDA (N2) 3.95e-05 3.89e-04 2.68e-05 8.91e-05 1.06e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.44e-05 3.51e-04 2.37e-05 7.91e-05 9.43e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.25e-05 3.19e-04 1.67e-05 6.18e-05 8.12e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.06e-05 3.92e-04 2.00e-05 6.43e-05 8.31e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.20e-05 4.02e-04 5.20e-05 2.30e-04 1.58e-04 oneAPI (I1) 9.42e-05 7.73e-04 3.60e-05 2.67e-04 3.09e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.84e-04 5.68e-04 2.19e-05 9.52e-05 1.04e-04 dirichlet-100 154k 109k 915k 1.1M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.97e-03 1.19e-05 8.14e-03 1.00e-02 CPU-4T (C3) 1.30e-07 1.77e-03 1.26e-05 1.54e-03 2.17e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.20e-07 1.61e-03 1.24e-05 1.01e-03 1.34e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 1.30e-07 1.46e-03 1.21e-05 8.68e-04 1.07e-03 

80 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N1) 4.36e-05 3.85e-04 2.55e-05 2.22e-04 2.43e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.27e-05 8.48e-04 2.86e-05 9.74e-05 1.14e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.52e-05 6.63e-04 2.40e-05 8.11e-05 9.57e-05 

CUDA (N4) 2.26e-05 4.03e-04 1.70e-05 1.66e-04 2.25e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.37e-05 4.71e-04 1.94e-05 1.22e-04 1.69e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 4.76e-05 5.57e-04 4.45e-05 1.82e-04 2.04e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.22e-04 7.40e-04 3.76e-05 2.61e-04 3.12e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.17e-04 7.54e-04 2.13e-05 2.29e-04 2.68e-04 elec-5 15 5 15 225 CPU (C3) 6.00e-08 5.00e-08 1.10e-07 2.00e-08 3.60e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.70e-07 1.30e-07 3.60e-07 1.60e-07 5.90e-07 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-07 1.40e-07 3.60e-07 1.60e-07 6.00e-07 CPU-16T (C3) 1.70e-07 1.40e-07 3.60e-07 1.60e-07 6.00e-07 CUDA (N1) 4.74e-05 5.76e-06 2.26e-05 1.22e-05 2.01e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.01e-05 6.89e-06 2.74e-05 1.29e-05 2.24e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.51e-05 6.17e-06 2.48e-05 1.18e-05 2.03e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.22e-05 4.44e-06 1.71e-05 8.15e-06 1.44e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.79e-05 6.76e-06 2.72e-05 1.38e-05 2.23e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.24e-05 1.22e-05 4.63e-05 2.34e-05 3.81e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.10e-04 8.77e-06 3.41e-05 2.12e-05 3.65e-05 Metal (M1 *) 3.12e-04 5.68e-06 2.35e-05 1.14e-05 1.97e-05 elec-50 150 50 150 26k CPU (C3) 4.03e-06 8.00e-08 9.78e-06 8.00e-08 4.09e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 1.36e-05 1.40e-07 3.55e-05 2.10e-07 3.53e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.17e-05 1.40e-07 2.97e-05 2.20e-07 3.48e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.00e-05 1.40e-07 2.92e-05 2.10e-07 3.49e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.84e-05 4.65e-06 2.98e-05 9.86e-06 1.65e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.88e-05 7.45e-06 4.04e-05 1.36e-05 2.92e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.05e-05 7.03e-06 3.03e-05 1.35e-05 2.31e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.28e-05 4.66e-06 2.97e-05 8.73e-06 2.51e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.53e-05 6.05e-06 3.18e-05 1.16e-05 2.55e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 7.20e-05 1.23e-05 4.77e-05 2.41e-05 3.54e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.17e-04 8.56e-06 5.27e-05 2.10e-05 3.52e-05 Metal (M1 *) 2.94e-04 5.73e-06 3.37e-05 1.07e-05 4.99e-05 elec-200 600 200 600 418k CPU (C3) 6.55e-05 2.00e-07 1.66e-04 3.30e-07 6.75e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 3.72e-05 1.60e-07 4.01e-04 3.90e-07 2.50e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 3.17e-05 1.60e-07 4.11e-04 4.00e-07 2.43e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 4.10e-05 1.60e-07 4.37e-04 3.90e-07 2.71e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.52e-05 5.93e-06 1.24e-04 1.27e-05 1.85e-05 

CUDA (N2) 5.71e-05 7.75e-06 1.69e-04 1.39e-05 3.12e-05 CUDA (N3) 4.91e-05 6.37e-06 1.22e-04 1.20e-05 2.61e-05 CUDA (N4) 3.16e-05 4.44e-06 1.08e-04 8.22e-06 2.69e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.41e-05 5.61e-06 1.24e-04 1.06e-05 2.75e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.52e-05 1.18e-05 1.68e-04 2.27e-05 3.78e-05 oneAPI (I1) 2.23e-04 8.58e-06 1.98e-04 2.08e-05 3.79e-05 Metal (M1 *) 4.51e-04 6.17e-06 2.50e-04 1.64e-05 8.83e-05 gasoil-2 55 52 262 734 CPU (C3) 9.50e-07 8.40e-07 1.52e-06 9.60e-07 3.09e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.06e-06 2.12e-06 1.77e-06 2.39e-06 4.73e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.07e-06 2.14e-06 1.77e-06 2.40e-06 4.74e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.06e-06 2.14e-06 1.77e-06 2.40e-06 4.84e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.81e-05 7.85e-05 2.98e-05 7.83e-05 1.00e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.36e-05 5.88e-05 2.93e-05 6.67e-05 8.36e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.69e-05 5.03e-05 2.61e-05 5.75e-05 7.16e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.54e-05 3.48e-05 1.78e-05 4.12e-05 5.20e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.67e-05 3.83e-05 2.04e-05 4.61e-05 5.82e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.23e-05 1.04e-04 4.98e-05 1.20e-04 1.48e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.18e-04 8.62e-05 4.05e-05 1.59e-04 2.07e-04 Metal (M1 *) 4.12e-04 7.69e-05 7.72e-05 6.73e-05 8.47e-05 gasoil-200 5k 5k 27k 12k CPU (C3) 9.50e-07 7.80e-05 1.88e-06 9.49e-05 9.02e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 1.07e-06 6.36e-05 2.24e-06 7.13e-05 6.68e-05 

CPU-8T (C3) 1.06e-06 6.56e-05 2.24e-06 7.20e-05 6.77e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.08e-06 6.06e-05 2.24e-06 6.67e-05 6.78e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.52e-05 7.43e-05 2.86e-05 9.31e-05 1.23e-04 

81 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N2) 4.24e-05 6.06e-05 2.81e-05 7.17e-05 9.14e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.69e-05 5.24e-05 2.55e-05 6.13e-05 7.51e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.55e-05 5.80e-05 1.78e-05 6.85e-05 7.62e-05 CUDA (N6) 4.09e-05 8.29e-05 2.60e-05 8.40e-05 1.02e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.29e-05 1.10e-04 5.11e-05 1.18e-04 1.46e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.16e-04 8.74e-05 3.95e-05 1.57e-04 1.99e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.94e-04 5.60e-05 2.96e-05 5.79e-05 7.45e-05 gasoil-18000 468k 468k 2.4M 1.0M CPU (C3) 9.80e-07 7.10e-03 3.65e-05 8.80e-03 8.08e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.08e-06 1.77e-03 4.01e-05 2.48e-03 2.01e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.07e-06 9.80e-04 3.92e-05 1.84e-03 1.39e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 1.08e-06 6.43e-04 3.96e-05 1.61e-03 1.08e-03 CUDA (N1) 4.19e-05 1.42e-04 4.32e-05 1.84e-04 2.13e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.51e-05 2.65e-04 3.02e-05 3.18e-04 3.13e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.90e-05 1.51e-04 2.86e-05 1.95e-04 2.00e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.64e-05 4.13e-04 1.89e-05 5.63e-04 5.30e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.96e-05 1.71e-04 2.42e-05 2.16e-04 2.31e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.05e-05 1.31e-04 5.10e-05 1.37e-04 1.71e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.94e-03 9.54e-05 4.13e-05 1.52e-04 1.85e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.06e-04 1.49e-04 3.19e-05 2.29e-04 1.19e-04 

glider-2 16 15 63 252 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.22e-06 7.90e-07 1.50e-06 6.85e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.15e-06 5.93e-06 1.32e-06 6.43e-06 1.33e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.15e-06 5.48e-06 1.33e-06 6.44e-06 1.30e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.20e-06 5.42e-06 1.32e-06 6.65e-06 1.36e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.95e-05 7.10e-05 1.86e-05 8.26e-05 1.63e-04 CUDA (N2) 3.92e-05 1.08e-04 2.85e-05 1.19e-04 2.17e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.64e-05 1.11e-04 2.54e-05 1.24e-04 1.64e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.20e-05 8.01e-05 1.76e-05 8.52e-05 3.56e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.26e-05 9.17e-05 2.19e-05 1.05e-04 5.66e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.09e-05 1.67e-04 4.71e-05 1.84e-04 4.30e-04 oneAPI (I1) — — — — —Metal (M1 *) 2.87e-04 1.20e-04 2.51e-05 1.46e-04 8.43e-04 glider-80 406 327 2k 10k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.17e-05 8.20e-07 3.01e-05 2.45e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 1.18e-06 1.57e-05 1.37e-06 3.35e-05 2.64e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.16e-06 1.58e-05 1.35e-06 3.38e-05 2.64e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.15e-06 1.57e-05 1.34e-06 3.41e-05 2.63e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.24e-05 8.61e-05 2.40e-05 1.09e-04 1.91e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.34e-05 1.17e-04 3.08e-05 1.33e-04 3.13e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.54e-05 1.07e-04 2.56e-05 1.12e-04 2.36e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.24e-05 8.36e-05 1.82e-05 9.24e-05 3.77e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.13e-05 8.16e-05 1.95e-05 9.36e-05 5.54e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 4.80e-05 2.39e-04 4.78e-05 1.84e-04 5.73e-04 oneAPI (I1) — — — — —Metal (M1 *) 2.86e-04 1.13e-04 2.37e-05 2.31e-04 9.25e-04 glider-8000 40k 32k 224k 1.0M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.08e-03 3.26e-06 2.95e-03 2.46e-02 CPU-4T (C3) 1.19e-06 3.05e-04 3.82e-06 8.39e-04 6.97e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.14e-06 2.21e-04 3.80e-06 5.42e-04 3.71e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 1.18e-06 2.32e-04 3.84e-06 5.80e-04 3.76e-03 CUDA (N1) 4.47e-05 1.64e-04 2.69e-05 2.21e-04 4.19e-04 

CUDA (N2) 3.93e-05 1.09e-04 2.88e-05 1.20e-04 8.66e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.46e-05 1.10e-04 2.56e-05 1.18e-04 7.65e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.23e-05 2.86e-04 1.81e-05 1.50e-04 1.03e-03 CUDA (N6) 3.91e-05 2.77e-04 2.65e-05 1.49e-04 1.09e-03 AMDGPU (A1) 5.12e-05 1.96e-04 5.18e-05 2.10e-04 3.20e-03 oneAPI (I1) — — — — —Metal (M1 *) 2.98e-04 1.57e-04 2.32e-05 2.30e-04 4.88e-03 marine-2 79 56 194 644 CPU (C3) 1.32e-06 4.40e-07 4.29e-06 4.30e-07 5.49e-06 CPU-4T (C3) 1.40e-06 1.64e-06 2.22e-06 1.90e-06 4.30e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.39e-06 1.65e-06 2.21e-06 1.87e-06 4.20e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.39e-06 1.64e-06 2.23e-06 1.88e-06 4.16e-06 

CUDA (N1) 3.96e-05 6.40e-05 2.00e-05 8.24e-05 1.33e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.32e-05 5.44e-05 2.95e-05 6.47e-05 8.13e-05 

82 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N3) 3.83e-05 5.14e-05 2.81e-05 6.05e-05 7.75e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.44e-05 3.48e-05 1.85e-05 4.07e-05 5.09e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.75e-05 4.32e-05 2.38e-05 5.11e-05 6.27e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.34e-05 9.95e-05 4.81e-05 1.27e-04 1.57e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.25e-04 1.36e-04 3.92e-05 2.53e-04 2.80e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.96e-04 4.43e-05 2.18e-05 5.44e-05 6.46e-05 marine-150 5k 5k 16k 12k CPU (C3) 1.32e-06 2.73e-05 4.59e-06 3.29e-05 3.20e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.40e-06 4.05e-05 2.81e-06 4.12e-05 4.09e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.44e-06 4.23e-05 2.81e-06 4.31e-05 4.28e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.42e-06 4.21e-05 2.76e-06 4.17e-05 3.90e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.54e-05 4.50e-05 2.13e-05 5.29e-05 6.03e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.03e-05 5.69e-05 2.79e-05 6.49e-05 8.05e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.70e-05 5.07e-05 2.49e-05 5.74e-05 7.27e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.30e-05 3.41e-05 1.76e-05 3.96e-05 4.94e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.47e-05 4.14e-05 2.18e-05 4.78e-05 5.93e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.29e-05 1.08e-04 4.49e-05 1.37e-04 1.75e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.54e-04 1.48e-04 4.03e-05 2.77e-04 3.03e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.98e-04 4.63e-05 2.15e-05 5.27e-05 6.34e-05 marine-14000 448k 448k 1.5M 1.0M CPU (C3) 1.33e-06 2.59e-03 3.69e-05 3.15e-03 2.64e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.43e-06 6.64e-04 3.91e-05 1.05e-03 8.51e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.44e-06 4.18e-04 3.68e-05 1.04e-03 8.61e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.41e-06 3.98e-04 3.59e-05 1.10e-03 8.57e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.33e-05 4.66e-05 2.19e-05 5.68e-05 6.55e-05 

CUDA (N2) 4.39e-05 1.04e-04 3.08e-05 1.42e-04 1.48e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.61e-05 6.44e-05 2.55e-05 8.96e-05 9.55e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.35e-05 7.87e-05 1.78e-05 1.26e-04 1.28e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.21e-05 4.63e-05 1.96e-05 6.19e-05 7.00e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.89e-05 1.28e-04 4.95e-05 1.65e-04 2.11e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.78e-03 1.46e-04 3.78e-05 2.76e-04 2.96e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.85e-04 8.54e-05 2.34e-05 1.44e-04 1.35e-04 methanol-2 65 60 312 993 CPU (C3) 9.00e-07 8.80e-07 1.53e-06 1.10e-06 3.54e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.01e-06 2.57e-06 1.57e-06 2.92e-06 5.52e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.00e-06 2.56e-06 1.58e-06 3.00e-06 5.40e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.01e-06 2.56e-06 1.71e-06 2.99e-06 5.46e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.45e-05 5.58e-05 2.19e-05 6.62e-05 7.70e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.14e-05 6.61e-05 2.79e-05 7.91e-05 9.81e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.59e-05 6.34e-05 2.51e-05 7.35e-05 8.94e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.30e-05 4.54e-05 1.74e-05 5.21e-05 6.34e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.80e-05 6.70e-05 2.88e-05 7.54e-05 9.73e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.51e-05 1.32e-04 5.45e-05 1.56e-04 2.12e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.14e-04 1.19e-04 4.37e-05 2.09e-04 2.43e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.93e-04 6.91e-05 2.32e-05 7.60e-05 8.38e-05 methanol-50 2k 2k 8k 13k CPU (C3) 9.00e-07 1.99e-05 1.62e-06 2.70e-05 3.86e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.01e-06 1.90e-05 1.79e-06 2.20e-05 3.87e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.01e-06 1.90e-05 1.78e-06 2.20e-05 3.92e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.01e-06 1.91e-05 1.79e-06 2.23e-05 3.87e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.16e-05 6.65e-05 1.88e-05 6.58e-05 6.45e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.37e-05 7.17e-05 3.00e-05 8.29e-05 1.02e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.84e-05 7.11e-05 2.84e-05 8.06e-05 9.69e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.45e-05 4.77e-05 1.89e-05 5.48e-05 6.65e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.88e-05 5.39e-05 2.42e-05 6.83e-05 8.23e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.03e-05 1.02e-04 4.63e-05 1.16e-04 1.33e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.15e-04 1.01e-04 3.67e-05 2.06e-04 2.59e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.85e-04 6.39e-05 2.33e-05 7.44e-05 1.14e-04 methanol-4000 120k 120k 648k 985k CPU (C3) 9.10e-07 1.59e-03 9.20e-06 2.22e-03 2.97e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.02e-06 4.44e-04 1.13e-05 7.01e-04 1.09e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.02e-06 3.23e-04 1.04e-05 6.14e-04 9.40e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.05e-06 3.06e-04 1.03e-05 6.54e-04 1.01e-03 CUDA (N1) 3.96e-05 4.62e-05 1.71e-05 6.52e-05 1.57e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.14e-05 8.26e-05 2.84e-05 1.15e-04 2.98e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.66e-05 6.74e-05 2.50e-05 8.16e-05 2.26e-04 

83 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N4) 2.40e-05 6.74e-05 1.76e-05 7.94e-05 2.61e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.31e-05 8.54e-05 2.21e-05 9.64e-05 3.42e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.20e-05 9.82e-05 4.72e-05 1.10e-04 2.30e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.71e-03 9.82e-05 3.81e-05 1.87e-04 2.27e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.81e-04 7.68e-05 2.29e-05 1.23e-04 4.15e-04 minsurf-(5, 5) 49 102 102 504 CPU (C3) 1.69e-06 1.70e-07 3.94e-06 5.00e-08 6.19e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.87e-06 7.80e-07 3.83e-06 9.40e-07 7.54e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.87e-06 8.00e-07 3.83e-06 9.20e-07 7.22e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.89e-06 7.80e-07 3.81e-06 9.20e-07 7.65e-06 CUDA (N1) 5.08e-05 3.26e-05 2.94e-05 4.52e-05 5.82e-05 CUDA (N2) 5.63e-05 4.71e-05 4.02e-05 5.87e-05 8.73e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.00e-05 4.07e-05 3.56e-05 4.86e-05 7.29e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.92e-05 2.81e-05 2.37e-05 3.42e-05 5.19e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.88e-05 3.13e-05 2.54e-05 3.76e-05 5.68e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 6.18e-05 6.97e-05 5.79e-05 8.54e-05 1.19e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.63e-04 6.47e-05 5.43e-05 1.22e-04 1.73e-04 Metal (M1 *) 2.99e-04 3.79e-05 3.04e-05 4.86e-05 6.64e-05 minsurf-(30, 30) 1k 1k 1k 13k CPU (C3) 4.28e-05 1.64e-06 1.03e-04 4.70e-07 1.64e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 4.21e-05 1.61e-06 8.92e-05 1.38e-06 1.53e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.21e-05 1.64e-06 8.81e-05 1.37e-06 1.53e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 4.23e-05 1.61e-06 8.83e-05 1.37e-06 1.53e-04 CUDA (N1) 6.12e-05 4.05e-05 3.17e-05 4.57e-05 8.61e-05 CUDA (N2) 6.59e-05 4.37e-05 3.75e-05 5.43e-05 8.39e-05 CUDA (N3) 5.74e-05 4.03e-05 3.57e-05 4.98e-05 7.49e-05 CUDA (N4) 7.44e-05 2.82e-05 9.60e-05 3.51e-05 1.23e-04 CUDA (N6) 8.63e-05 4.05e-05 9.79e-05 4.78e-05 1.13e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 9.33e-05 1.36e-04 5.93e-05 9.03e-05 1.27e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.48e-04 7.61e-05 5.62e-05 1.21e-04 1.76e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.14e-04 3.80e-05 3.60e-05 4.75e-05 6.78e-05 

minsurf-(280, 280) 80k 101k 101k 1.1M CPU (C3) 3.60e-03 1.24e-04 8.63e-03 3.08e-05 1.40e-02 CPU-4T (C3) 1.14e-03 6.43e-05 3.50e-03 8.71e-05 3.71e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 8.17e-04 5.03e-05 2.79e-03 1.11e-04 2.12e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 5.31e-04 9.42e-05 2.63e-03 1.61e-04 1.45e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.50e-05 3.17e-05 2.60e-05 3.72e-05 5.79e-05 

CUDA (N2) 6.86e-05 4.99e-05 4.25e-05 5.84e-05 8.83e-05 CUDA (N3) 6.12e-05 4.47e-05 3.87e-05 5.42e-05 8.19e-05 CUDA (N4) 7.44e-05 3.00e-05 9.88e-05 3.70e-05 1.35e-04 CUDA (N6) 8.89e-05 3.90e-05 9.98e-05 4.69e-05 1.18e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 1.27e-04 1.15e-04 7.34e-05 1.44e-04 1.77e-04 oneAPI (I1) 5.85e-03 6.86e-05 5.42e-05 1.24e-04 1.75e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.90e-04 3.93e-05 1.22e-04 4.78e-05 1.64e-04 pinene-2 105 100 438 595 CPU (C3) 7.10e-07 1.27e-06 1.54e-06 1.46e-06 2.79e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 8.20e-07 3.18e-06 1.26e-06 3.52e-06 5.13e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 8.20e-07 3.27e-06 1.25e-06 3.56e-06 5.12e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 8.20e-07 3.19e-06 1.26e-06 3.57e-06 5.18e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.64e-05 8.98e-05 2.07e-05 1.16e-04 8.15e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.15e-05 8.38e-05 2.83e-05 9.30e-05 1.14e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.59e-05 7.17e-05 2.50e-05 8.20e-05 1.01e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.40e-05 5.18e-05 1.76e-05 5.88e-05 7.22e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.20e-05 6.35e-05 2.22e-05 7.21e-05 8.54e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.14e-05 1.36e-04 4.63e-05 1.62e-04 1.89e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.41e-04 3.09e-04 5.29e-05 5.19e-04 5.54e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.36e-04 7.35e-05 2.46e-05 8.80e-05 9.74e-05 pinene-100 5k 5k 23k 11k CPU (C3) 7.10e-07 6.03e-05 1.87e-06 7.15e-05 5.88e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 8.30e-07 6.20e-05 1.76e-06 6.86e-05 6.09e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 8.30e-07 6.35e-05 1.79e-06 7.03e-05 5.91e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 9.50e-07 5.28e-05 1.89e-06 6.41e-05 6.34e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.60e-05 8.71e-05 1.99e-05 1.12e-04 1.22e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.49e-05 9.02e-05 2.96e-05 1.04e-04 1.22e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.65e-05 7.49e-05 2.49e-05 8.64e-05 1.02e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.36e-05 5.37e-05 1.79e-05 5.99e-05 7.52e-05 

84 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N6) 3.34e-05 6.07e-05 1.98e-05 6.64e-05 7.97e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.14e-05 1.48e-04 4.72e-05 1.61e-04 2.02e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.71e-04 3.17e-04 5.44e-05 5.54e-04 5.91e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.33e-04 7.29e-05 2.35e-05 7.91e-05 9.44e-05 pinene-10000 500k 500k 2.3M 1.1M CPU (C3) 7.40e-07 6.10e-03 3.83e-05 7.39e-03 5.82e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 8.20e-07 1.56e-03 4.15e-05 2.33e-03 1.87e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 8.50e-07 9.01e-04 3.87e-05 1.77e-03 1.28e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 8.60e-07 7.54e-04 3.87e-05 1.80e-03 1.17e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.01e-05 8.81e-05 2.87e-05 1.21e-04 1.35e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.37e-05 2.45e-04 2.92e-05 2.95e-04 2.91e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.62e-05 1.43e-04 2.51e-05 1.81e-04 1.94e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.39e-05 3.44e-04 1.77e-05 4.66e-04 4.46e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.75e-05 1.66e-04 2.86e-05 2.28e-04 2.26e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.29e-05 1.35e-04 4.53e-05 1.60e-04 1.84e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.50e-03 3.26e-04 7.38e-05 5.30e-04 5.75e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.30e-04 1.38e-04 2.80e-05 2.28e-04 1.55e-04 polygon-10 10 16 50 140 CPU (C3) 5.00e-08 1.40e-07 7.00e-08 1.90e-07 4.10e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.50e-07 5.70e-07 3.00e-07 7.60e-07 1.14e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.50e-07 5.60e-07 2.80e-07 7.60e-07 1.11e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.50e-07 5.70e-07 3.00e-07 7.50e-07 1.11e-06 CUDA (N1) 3.72e-05 2.05e-05 1.87e-05 2.75e-05 5.15e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.48e-05 3.24e-05 3.02e-05 4.08e-05 5.43e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.70e-05 2.95e-05 2.71e-05 3.85e-05 4.91e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.36e-05 1.95e-05 1.77e-05 2.53e-05 3.27e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.74e-05 2.49e-05 2.06e-05 3.24e-05 4.16e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.99e-05 4.82e-05 4.64e-05 6.19e-05 7.52e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.21e-04 5.98e-05 8.41e-05 1.06e-04 1.44e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.29e-04 3.49e-05 2.29e-05 3.42e-05 4.43e-05 polygon-100 100 1k 5k 13k CPU (C3) 2.80e-07 8.66e-06 5.10e-07 1.83e-05 3.58e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 3.20e-07 1.70e-05 8.70e-07 2.58e-05 3.66e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 3.20e-07 1.33e-05 8.50e-07 1.83e-05 3.17e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 3.30e-07 1.80e-05 8.70e-07 2.42e-05 4.12e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.94e-05 1.87e-05 1.70e-05 2.43e-05 3.02e-05 

CUDA (N2) 3.80e-05 2.93e-05 2.67e-05 3.87e-05 5.05e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.49e-05 2.61e-05 2.39e-05 3.50e-05 4.57e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.28e-05 1.88e-05 1.67e-05 2.51e-05 3.23e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.41e-05 2.16e-05 2.13e-05 2.79e-05 3.96e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.37e-05 4.87e-05 4.80e-05 6.40e-05 7.86e-05 oneAPI (I1) 1.42e-04 7.02e-05 6.34e-05 1.15e-04 1.58e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.26e-04 2.71e-05 2.20e-05 3.44e-05 4.51e-05 polygon-800 800 80k 320k 802k CPU (C3) 2.08e-06 5.76e-04 3.95e-06 1.28e-03 2.32e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.64e-06 1.48e-04 5.36e-06 3.85e-04 7.44e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-06 7.93e-05 5.49e-06 2.46e-04 5.25e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.61e-06 6.91e-05 5.69e-06 2.58e-04 5.37e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.25e-05 2.21e-05 2.26e-05 3.16e-05 4.01e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.56e-05 3.37e-05 3.08e-05 4.23e-05 5.53e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.57e-05 2.67e-05 2.54e-05 3.62e-05 4.76e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.36e-05 1.93e-05 1.73e-05 2.55e-05 4.60e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.44e-05 2.10e-05 1.89e-05 2.77e-05 3.61e-05 

AMDGPU (A1) 6.61e-05 4.86e-05 4.59e-05 6.12e-05 7.46e-05 oneAPI (I1) 3.71e-03 5.84e-05 5.94e-05 1.13e-04 1.53e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.45e-04 2.64e-05 2.20e-05 4.17e-05 1.31e-04 robot-2 28 24 84 134 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.70e-07 2.00e-08 2.40e-07 4.20e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.30e-07 7.86e-05 2.40e-07 3.89e-05 3.89e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 7.37e-05 2.20e-07 3.98e-05 4.08e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.30e-07 8.90e-05 2.30e-07 4.17e-05 4.28e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.15e-05 2.84e-04 2.03e-05 2.30e-04 2.29e-04 CUDA (N2) 3.93e-05 3.54e-04 2.64e-05 2.59e-04 2.85e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.45e-05 3.69e-04 2.40e-05 2.80e-04 3.38e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.19e-05 3.10e-04 1.67e-05 2.02e-04 2.21e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.62e-05 4.07e-04 2.72e-05 2.45e-04 2.58e-04 

85 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

AMDGPU (A1) 5.11e-05 4.67e-04 4.61e-05 3.67e-04 3.91e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.25e-04 6.42e-04 3.74e-05 5.71e-04 6.30e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.04e-04 2.50e-04 2.17e-05 2.41e-04 2.57e-04 robot-150 1k 912 5k 10k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 4.64e-06 1.10e-07 1.47e-05 3.01e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.30e-07 8.77e-05 3.30e-07 5.54e-05 7.24e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.20e-07 9.20e-05 3.10e-07 5.68e-05 7.27e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.30e-07 8.68e-05 3.10e-07 5.45e-05 7.27e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.78e-05 2.96e-04 1.82e-05 2.07e-04 2.24e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.25e-05 3.67e-04 2.85e-05 2.59e-04 2.90e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.73e-05 4.11e-04 2.72e-05 2.73e-04 2.96e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.30e-05 3.17e-04 1.78e-05 2.00e-04 2.25e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.67e-05 3.88e-04 2.37e-05 2.60e-04 2.66e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.20e-05 5.05e-04 4.66e-05 3.46e-04 3.69e-04 oneAPI (I1) 9.70e-05 6.28e-04 3.79e-05 5.53e-04 6.09e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.32e-04 2.50e-04 2.31e-05 3.05e-04 3.28e-04 robot-15000 135k 90k 540k 1.0M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 4.59e-04 9.98e-06 1.48e-03 3.08e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.30e-07 2.55e-04 1.06e-05 6.67e-04 1.23e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 2.85e-04 1.01e-05 6.00e-04 9.47e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.40e-07 3.51e-04 1.07e-05 5.80e-04 8.25e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.29e-05 2.92e-04 2.10e-05 2.37e-04 2.23e-04 

CUDA (N2) 3.92e-05 3.57e-04 2.63e-05 2.65e-04 3.00e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.50e-05 4.23e-04 2.49e-05 2.75e-04 3.25e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.27e-05 3.24e-04 1.66e-05 2.02e-04 2.22e-04 

CUDA (N6) 3.42e-05 3.47e-04 2.02e-05 2.63e-04 2.74e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.01e-05 4.51e-04 4.56e-05 3.49e-04 3.54e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.76e-03 5.19e-04 3.79e-05 5.14e-04 5.85e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.07e-04 2.59e-04 2.21e-05 2.61e-04 3.09e-04 rocket-2 13 10 42 118 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.10e-07 2.00e-08 1.20e-07 2.90e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.30e-07 9.70e-07 2.20e-07 1.22e-06 1.68e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.20e-07 9.40e-07 2.20e-07 1.24e-06 1.69e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.30e-07 9.50e-07 2.20e-07 1.23e-06 1.68e-06 CUDA (N1) 4.53e-05 3.88e-05 2.03e-05 4.68e-05 5.68e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.38e-05 5.57e-05 2.96e-05 6.62e-05 8.03e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.49e-05 4.71e-05 2.38e-05 5.62e-05 7.02e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.24e-05 3.35e-05 1.66e-05 4.05e-05 4.93e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.09e-05 3.74e-05 1.85e-05 4.41e-05 5.50e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.03e-05 8.79e-05 4.64e-05 1.02e-04 1.18e-04 oneAPI (I1) 9.63e-05 9.95e-05 3.66e-05 1.57e-04 1.90e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.06e-04 4.75e-05 2.13e-05 5.95e-05 6.73e-05 rocket-200 805 604 4k 12k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.68e-06 7.00e-08 9.24e-06 2.84e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 1.30e-07 3.64e-06 2.80e-07 8.45e-06 2.73e-05 

CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 3.65e-06 2.70e-07 8.51e-06 2.78e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 1.30e-07 3.62e-06 2.70e-07 8.47e-06 2.77e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.57e-05 4.23e-05 2.12e-05 4.78e-05 5.64e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.00e-05 5.73e-05 2.72e-05 6.61e-05 8.37e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.49e-05 4.76e-05 2.44e-05 5.72e-05 7.08e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.22e-05 3.37e-05 1.66e-05 4.07e-05 5.01e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.61e-05 5.22e-05 2.51e-05 6.36e-05 7.65e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.15e-05 8.43e-05 4.43e-05 1.01e-04 1.18e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.15e-04 9.64e-05 3.77e-05 1.59e-04 1.93e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.08e-04 4.85e-05 2.13e-05 5.60e-05 7.06e-05 rocket-17000 68k 51k 323k 1.0M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.09e-04 4.22e-06 8.18e-04 2.47e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.20e-07 1.02e-04 4.73e-06 3.49e-04 1.02e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 7.54e-05 4.57e-06 2.34e-04 7.97e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.30e-07 1.27e-04 4.46e-06 3.07e-04 7.04e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.96e-05 5.65e-05 2.47e-05 5.92e-05 7.40e-05 

CUDA (N2) 4.34e-05 5.78e-05 2.91e-05 6.89e-05 1.13e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.74e-05 5.38e-05 2.79e-05 6.78e-05 9.42e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.35e-05 3.53e-05 1.79e-05 6.09e-05 1.34e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.78e-05 4.71e-05 2.36e-05 6.16e-05 1.38e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 4.88e-05 8.56e-05 4.46e-05 1.00e-04 1.65e-04 

86 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

oneAPI (I1) 2.97e-03 1.03e-04 3.76e-05 1.65e-04 1.98e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.05e-04 4.83e-05 2.28e-05 6.49e-05 3.05e-04 steering-5 31 28 108 120 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.60e-07 2.00e-08 2.30e-07 3.00e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 1.20e-07 1.36e-06 2.20e-07 1.68e-06 2.03e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 1.20e-07 1.37e-06 2.20e-07 1.69e-06 2.08e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 1.20e-07 1.40e-06 2.20e-07 1.64e-06 2.01e-06 CUDA (N1) 3.80e-05 3.55e-05 1.80e-05 3.95e-05 4.89e-05 CUDA (N2) 3.93e-05 5.69e-05 2.63e-05 6.32e-05 7.83e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.46e-05 4.79e-05 2.35e-05 5.64e-05 7.03e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.24e-05 3.44e-05 1.65e-05 4.01e-05 5.02e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.35e-05 4.21e-05 1.96e-05 4.96e-05 6.18e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.08e-05 8.95e-05 4.71e-05 1.02e-04 1.22e-04 oneAPI (I1) 9.60e-05 1.08e-04 4.19e-05 2.13e-04 2.56e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.08e-04 4.84e-05 2.28e-05 5.99e-05 7.07e-05 steering-400 2k 2k 8k 10k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 6.44e-06 1.50e-07 1.66e-05 2.22e-05 CPU-4T (C3) 1.20e-07 7.20e-06 3.50e-07 1.25e-05 2.00e-05 

CPU-8T (C3) 1.20e-07 7.25e-06 3.40e-07 1.37e-05 2.00e-05 

CPU-16T (C3) 1.20e-07 7.26e-06 3.50e-07 1.24e-05 2.02e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.19e-05 4.34e-05 2.22e-05 5.03e-05 5.63e-05 CUDA (N2) 4.17e-05 5.83e-05 2.79e-05 7.04e-05 8.60e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.45e-05 4.93e-05 2.39e-05 5.83e-05 7.17e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.26e-05 3.51e-05 1.70e-05 4.07e-05 5.12e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.40e-05 3.81e-05 1.86e-05 4.56e-05 5.63e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 4.82e-05 8.60e-05 4.54e-05 9.92e-05 1.11e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.61e-04 1.08e-04 4.22e-05 2.11e-04 2.55e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.29e-04 5.34e-05 2.19e-05 5.84e-05 6.88e-05 steering-42000 210k 168k 840k 1.0M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 6.73e-04 1.63e-05 1.76e-03 2.39e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.20e-07 2.24e-04 1.61e-05 6.81e-04 8.98e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.20e-07 1.73e-04 1.65e-05 6.02e-04 7.39e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.20e-07 1.91e-04 1.59e-05 5.60e-04 6.42e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.35e-05 4.34e-05 2.15e-05 5.30e-05 5.72e-05 

CUDA (N2) 4.03e-05 5.75e-05 2.65e-05 6.77e-05 8.29e-05 CUDA (N3) 3.50e-05 5.05e-05 2.43e-05 6.00e-05 7.39e-05 CUDA (N4) 2.23e-05 3.61e-05 1.69e-05 5.40e-05 7.44e-05 CUDA (N6) 3.78e-05 5.46e-05 2.78e-05 6.44e-05 7.80e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 5.08e-05 8.28e-05 4.37e-05 1.01e-04 1.17e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.54e-03 1.09e-04 4.21e-05 2.19e-04 2.66e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.33e-04 4.99e-05 2.19e-05 9.38e-05 1.17e-04 torsion-(5, 5) 49 49 49 360 CPU (C3) 4.70e-07 9.00e-08 1.12e-06 3.00e-08 8.50e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 8.40e-07 1.90e-07 1.72e-06 1.60e-07 1.41e-06 CPU-8T (C3) 8.40e-07 2.00e-07 1.72e-06 1.70e-07 1.41e-06 CPU-16T (C3) 8.30e-07 1.90e-07 1.71e-06 1.70e-07 1.41e-06 CUDA (N1) 5.40e-05 4.39e-06 3.48e-05 8.88e-06 3.23e-05 CUDA (N2) 7.80e-05 7.88e-06 6.01e-05 1.49e-05 5.73e-05 CUDA (N3) 6.70e-05 7.87e-06 5.78e-05 1.43e-05 5.23e-05 CUDA (N4) 4.18e-05 5.17e-06 3.76e-05 9.33e-06 3.52e-05 CUDA (N6) 6.14e-05 6.50e-06 4.81e-05 1.21e-05 4.50e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 9.12e-05 1.20e-05 8.97e-05 2.45e-05 7.77e-05 oneAPI (I1) 4.15e-04 1.48e-05 2.83e-04 5.89e-05 2.76e-04 Metal (M1 *) 4.31e-04 6.04e-06 4.87e-05 1.14e-05 4.40e-05 torsion-(35, 35) 1k 1k 1k 13k CPU (C3) 1.56e-05 1.43e-06 4.27e-05 4.40e-07 2.99e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 5.14e-05 9.41e-06 1.00e-04 7.28e-06 6.56e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 3.92e-05 4.48e-06 7.78e-05 4.39e-06 4.83e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 3.48e-05 3.88e-06 6.52e-05 3.83e-06 4.77e-05 CUDA (N1) 7.00e-05 5.23e-06 4.06e-05 1.02e-05 3.75e-05 CUDA (N2) 8.72e-05 7.48e-06 5.57e-05 1.37e-05 5.39e-05 CUDA (N3) 8.06e-05 6.94e-06 5.00e-05 1.36e-05 5.30e-05 CUDA (N4) 5.15e-05 5.02e-06 4.35e-05 9.08e-06 3.59e-05 CUDA (N6) 6.89e-05 6.10e-06 4.49e-05 1.11e-05 4.27e-05 AMDGPU (A1) 1.08e-04 1.12e-05 8.20e-05 2.22e-05 7.23e-05 oneAPI (I1) 4.98e-04 2.17e-05 3.01e-04 6.21e-05 2.95e-04 

87 Table 9: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 4.89e-04 5.74e-06 5.07e-05 1.14e-05 4.77e-05 torsion-(320, 320) 104k 104k 104k 1.0M CPU (C3) 1.25e-03 1.04e-04 3.26e-03 3.17e-05 2.43e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 7.06e-04 4.45e-05 4.83e-03 6.96e-05 8.42e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.37e-04 2.73e-05 4.37e-03 6.86e-05 6.22e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.10e-04 3.84e-05 5.55e-03 7.12e-05 7.65e-04 CUDA (N1) 7.36e-05 5.52e-06 4.21e-05 1.03e-05 3.96e-05 CUDA (N2) 9.46e-05 8.16e-06 8.00e-05 1.49e-05 5.74e-05 CUDA (N3) 7.55e-05 7.09e-06 5.22e-05 1.31e-05 5.10e-05 CUDA (N4) 5.29e-05 4.99e-06 6.79e-05 9.23e-06 6.01e-05 CUDA (N6) 6.95e-05 5.45e-06 5.41e-05 1.02e-05 3.84e-05 

AMDGPU (A1) 1.46e-04 1.19e-05 8.68e-05 2.38e-05 7.89e-05 oneAPI (I1) 7.82e-03 1.46e-05 2.87e-04 5.98e-05 2.81e-04 Metal (M1 *) 6.19e-04 8.35e-06 2.45e-04 1.16e-05 1.04e-04 

Table 10: Per-instance callback times (seconds) for PGLIB-OPF (polar formulation). 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

case3 lmbd 24 28 103 141 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.10e-07 2.00e-08 3.40e-07 5.10e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.40e-07 4.18e-05 2.30e-07 2.18e-05 2.29e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 3.95e-05 2.20e-07 2.17e-05 2.32e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.30e-07 4.05e-05 3.30e-07 2.19e-05 2.32e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.91e-05 2.11e-04 1.79e-05 1.32e-04 1.49e-04 CUDA (N2) 3.94e-05 2.42e-04 2.71e-05 1.94e-04 2.26e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.58e-05 2.72e-04 2.41e-05 1.85e-04 2.08e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.28e-05 1.92e-04 1.70e-05 1.37e-04 1.53e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.39e-05 1.98e-04 2.11e-05 1.60e-04 1.78e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.08e-05 2.90e-04 4.53e-05 2.56e-04 2.73e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.04e-04 3.13e-04 3.18e-05 3.58e-04 3.82e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.34e-04 2.11e-04 2.15e-05 1.57e-04 1.78e-04 case5 pjm 44 53 201 279 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.50e-07 3.00e-08 6.30e-07 9.70e-07 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.30e-07 4.12e-05 2.30e-07 2.29e-05 2.33e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 4.03e-05 2.30e-07 2.12e-05 2.32e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.30e-07 4.25e-05 3.40e-07 2.28e-05 2.37e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.02e-05 1.76e-04 2.03e-05 1.44e-04 1.55e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.46e-05 2.58e-04 3.08e-05 2.14e-04 2.29e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.70e-05 2.73e-04 2.61e-05 1.93e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.31e-05 1.93e-04 1.72e-05 1.33e-04 1.55e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.43e-05 2.03e-04 1.88e-05 1.64e-04 1.77e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 4.85e-05 2.94e-04 4.57e-05 2.48e-04 2.56e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.05e-04 3.00e-04 3.22e-05 3.40e-04 3.99e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.33e-04 1.78e-04 2.09e-05 1.66e-04 1.92e-04 case14 ieee 118 169 639 913 CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 9.20e-07 3.00e-08 2.04e-06 3.10e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.30e-07 4.19e-05 2.40e-07 2.39e-05 2.56e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.40e-07 4.14e-05 2.30e-07 2.37e-05 2.62e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.30e-07 4.25e-05 3.50e-07 2.41e-05 2.66e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.25e-05 1.73e-04 2.15e-05 1.39e-04 1.56e-04 CUDA (N2) 3.99e-05 2.43e-04 2.72e-05 1.95e-04 2.22e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.55e-05 2.68e-04 2.46e-05 1.89e-04 2.30e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.28e-05 1.89e-04 1.71e-05 1.31e-04 1.51e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.58e-05 2.29e-04 2.63e-05 1.78e-04 2.13e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.14e-05 2.97e-04 4.66e-05 2.56e-04 2.73e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.86e-03 3.54e-04 3.28e-05 3.84e-04 4.17e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.36e-04 2.20e-04 2.20e-05 1.94e-04 2.61e-04 case30 as 236 348 1k 2k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.87e-06 4.00e-08 4.10e-06 6.38e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.40e-07 4.34e-05 2.50e-07 2.58e-05 2.78e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 4.26e-05 2.40e-07 2.48e-05 2.81e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.20e-07 4.40e-05 3.60e-07 2.57e-05 2.84e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.54e-05 1.93e-04 2.18e-05 1.47e-04 1.58e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.39e-05 2.33e-04 3.00e-05 1.97e-04 2.20e-04 

88 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N3) 3.63e-05 2.36e-04 2.44e-05 1.76e-04 2.01e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.39e-05 1.79e-04 1.72e-05 1.34e-04 1.47e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.34e-05 2.00e-04 1.89e-05 1.47e-04 1.70e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.40e-05 3.06e-04 4.46e-05 2.46e-04 2.66e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.90e-03 3.44e-04 3.24e-05 3.72e-04 4.21e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.15e-04 2.19e-04 2.15e-05 1.87e-04 1.89e-04 case30 ieee 236 348 1k 2k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.88e-06 4.00e-08 4.11e-06 6.48e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.40e-07 4.35e-05 2.50e-07 2.55e-05 2.84e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 4.25e-05 2.40e-07 2.51e-05 2.82e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.40e-07 4.42e-05 3.60e-07 2.55e-05 2.91e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.25e-05 1.91e-04 2.11e-05 1.46e-04 1.57e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.16e-05 2.37e-04 2.73e-05 2.04e-04 2.10e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.68e-05 2.63e-04 2.52e-05 1.91e-04 2.22e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.37e-05 1.73e-04 1.69e-05 1.30e-04 1.48e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.33e-05 2.01e-04 2.12e-05 1.54e-04 1.71e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.06e-05 2.95e-04 4.53e-05 2.49e-04 2.69e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.06e-04 3.03e-04 3.24e-05 3.53e-04 3.93e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.16e-04 2.32e-04 2.17e-05 1.79e-04 1.95e-04 case24 ieee rts 266 315 1k 2k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.77e-06 6.00e-08 3.83e-06 6.17e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.80e-07 4.23e-05 3.30e-07 2.50e-05 2.84e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.70e-07 4.37e-05 3.20e-07 2.51e-05 2.76e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.80e-07 4.38e-05 4.40e-07 2.53e-05 2.87e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.70e-05 1.78e-04 1.77e-05 1.30e-04 1.41e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.27e-05 2.56e-04 3.03e-05 2.15e-04 2.41e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.80e-05 2.76e-04 2.80e-05 1.94e-04 2.22e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.40e-05 1.98e-04 1.82e-05 1.39e-04 1.61e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.76e-05 2.13e-04 2.34e-05 1.69e-04 1.80e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.20e-05 2.98e-04 4.70e-05 2.53e-04 2.74e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.07e-04 2.98e-04 3.20e-05 3.45e-04 3.81e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.08e-04 2.45e-04 2.17e-05 1.79e-04 2.13e-04 case39 epri 282 401 1k 2k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.05e-06 5.00e-08 4.58e-06 7.16e-06 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.40e-07 4.34e-05 2.70e-07 2.61e-05 2.90e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.40e-07 4.29e-05 2.60e-07 2.53e-05 2.95e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.40e-07 4.44e-05 3.80e-07 2.60e-05 2.99e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.35e-05 1.72e-04 1.99e-05 2.06e-04 2.13e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.80e-05 2.42e-04 2.71e-05 2.01e-04 2.17e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.68e-05 2.54e-04 2.46e-05 1.87e-04 2.14e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.33e-05 1.82e-04 1.70e-05 1.33e-04 1.48e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.98e-05 2.17e-04 2.53e-05 1.79e-04 2.06e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.14e-05 2.87e-04 4.37e-05 2.40e-04 2.62e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.26e-04 6.28e-04 4.57e-05 8.15e-04 9.37e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.24e-04 2.20e-04 2.14e-05 1.86e-04 1.90e-04 case57 ieee 448 675 3k 4k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.54e-06 7.00e-08 7.89e-06 1.26e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.40e-07 4.57e-05 2.70e-07 2.87e-05 3.44e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.30e-07 4.50e-05 2.70e-07 2.76e-05 3.43e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.40e-07 4.58e-05 3.80e-07 2.80e-05 3.50e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.91e-05 1.74e-04 1.96e-05 1.94e-04 2.16e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.38e-05 2.58e-04 3.03e-05 2.16e-04 2.24e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.86e-05 2.66e-04 2.81e-05 1.95e-04 2.16e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.44e-05 1.80e-04 1.80e-05 1.34e-04 1.54e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.60e-05 2.10e-04 2.05e-05 1.60e-04 1.80e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 4.99e-05 2.96e-04 4.51e-05 2.48e-04 2.67e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.37e-04 6.12e-04 4.91e-05 8.09e-04 9.02e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.16e-04 2.16e-04 2.15e-05 1.98e-04 1.95e-04 case60 c 518 737 3k 4k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.93e-06 7.00e-08 8.70e-06 1.42e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.70e-07 4.55e-05 3.20e-07 2.87e-05 3.55e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-07 4.53e-05 3.10e-07 2.89e-05 3.48e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.60e-07 4.67e-05 4.20e-07 2.92e-05 3.60e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.95e-05 1.98e-04 1.88e-05 1.50e-04 1.53e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.03e-05 2.38e-04 2.74e-05 1.90e-04 2.10e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.70e-05 2.38e-04 2.41e-05 1.87e-04 2.05e-04 

89 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N4) 2.37e-05 1.77e-04 1.69e-05 1.29e-04 1.45e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.33e-05 2.01e-04 2.07e-05 1.52e-04 1.70e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.12e-05 2.79e-04 4.52e-05 2.52e-04 2.62e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.89e-03 6.05e-04 4.44e-05 8.49e-04 9.65e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.21e-04 2.45e-04 2.20e-05 1.75e-04 2.67e-04 case73 ieee rts 824 987 4k 6k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 5.51e-06 1.50e-07 1.18e-05 1.87e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.10e-07 4.77e-05 5.50e-07 3.12e-05 4.00e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 2.10e-07 4.78e-05 5.40e-07 3.09e-05 4.00e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 3.10e-07 4.84e-05 6.60e-07 3.15e-05 4.03e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.52e-05 2.78e-04 2.19e-05 1.48e-04 1.68e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.43e-05 2.56e-04 3.05e-05 2.15e-04 2.35e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.72e-05 2.40e-04 2.49e-05 1.80e-04 2.14e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.40e-05 1.78e-04 1.73e-05 1.31e-04 1.48e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.51e-05 1.93e-04 1.90e-05 1.46e-04 1.69e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 4.88e-05 2.83e-04 4.41e-05 2.31e-04 2.48e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.30e-04 6.22e-04 4.01e-05 8.32e-04 8.56e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.14e-04 2.23e-04 2.22e-05 2.38e-04 1.87e-04 case89 pegase 1k 2k 7k 9k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 9.37e-06 9.00e-08 2.05e-05 3.27e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.50e-07 5.19e-05 3.30e-07 3.75e-05 5.29e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.40e-07 5.19e-05 3.10e-07 3.71e-05 5.25e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.40e-07 5.23e-05 4.30e-07 3.72e-05 5.28e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.44e-05 1.76e-04 2.11e-05 1.42e-04 1.58e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.06e-05 2.42e-04 2.76e-05 1.93e-04 2.12e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.61e-05 2.38e-04 2.46e-05 1.79e-04 2.03e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.32e-05 1.70e-04 1.70e-05 1.28e-04 1.48e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.95e-05 2.19e-04 2.63e-05 1.82e-04 2.00e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.12e-05 2.74e-04 4.46e-05 2.35e-04 2.55e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.24e-04 5.70e-04 3.84e-05 8.04e-04 8.70e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.13e-04 1.96e-04 2.14e-05 1.73e-04 1.75e-04 case118 ieee 1k 2k 6k 8k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 8.38e-06 1.30e-07 1.83e-05 2.91e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.90e-07 5.05e-05 4.40e-07 3.61e-05 4.94e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.80e-07 5.31e-05 4.30e-07 3.74e-05 5.16e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.90e-07 5.12e-05 5.50e-07 3.59e-05 4.97e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.88e-05 1.78e-04 1.75e-05 1.30e-04 1.39e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.50e-05 2.61e-04 3.01e-05 2.07e-04 2.23e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.88e-05 2.56e-04 2.78e-05 2.00e-04 2.19e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.42e-05 1.80e-04 1.82e-05 1.33e-04 1.54e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.77e-05 2.15e-04 2.21e-05 1.66e-04 1.79e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.22e-05 2.90e-04 4.70e-05 2.41e-04 2.65e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.17e-04 4.68e-04 3.33e-05 5.94e-04 6.51e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.16e-04 2.24e-04 2.18e-05 1.57e-04 1.77e-04 case200 activ 1k 2k 8k 11k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.12e-05 1.40e-07 2.44e-05 3.90e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.70e-07 5.43e-05 4.20e-07 4.03e-05 5.78e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-07 5.36e-05 4.20e-07 4.02e-05 5.74e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.70e-07 5.51e-05 5.30e-07 4.02e-05 5.80e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.82e-05 2.30e-04 2.67e-05 1.93e-04 2.06e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.42e-05 2.59e-04 2.96e-05 2.07e-04 2.29e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.86e-05 2.53e-04 2.80e-05 1.99e-04 2.23e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.43e-05 1.79e-04 1.83e-05 1.32e-04 1.52e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.70e-05 2.14e-04 2.40e-05 1.61e-04 1.82e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.04e-05 2.77e-04 4.35e-05 2.28e-04 2.48e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.06e-04 2.89e-04 3.18e-05 3.40e-04 3.82e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.20e-04 2.39e-04 2.15e-05 1.81e-04 2.02e-04 case179 goc 1k 2k 8k 12k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.20e-05 1.30e-07 2.61e-05 4.18e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.70e-07 5.48e-05 4.00e-07 4.17e-05 6.08e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.70e-07 5.85e-05 3.90e-07 4.35e-05 6.21e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.70e-07 5.60e-05 5.00e-07 4.16e-05 6.08e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.30e-05 1.81e-04 1.99e-05 1.41e-04 1.58e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.44e-05 2.58e-04 3.02e-05 2.06e-04 2.32e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.81e-05 2.68e-04 2.54e-05 2.05e-04 2.17e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.42e-05 1.80e-04 1.75e-05 1.32e-04 1.49e-04 

90 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

CUDA (N6) 3.42e-05 2.05e-04 1.93e-05 1.59e-04 1.75e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.06e-05 2.87e-04 4.65e-05 2.45e-04 2.67e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.07e-04 2.83e-04 3.17e-05 3.43e-04 3.74e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.21e-04 2.13e-04 2.12e-05 1.86e-04 2.16e-04 case162 ieee dtc 1k 2k 9k 13k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.27e-05 1.20e-07 2.81e-05 4.47e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.50e-07 5.52e-05 3.50e-07 4.28e-05 6.36e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.40e-07 5.86e-05 3.40e-07 4.47e-05 6.57e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.40e-07 5.63e-05 4.60e-07 4.30e-05 6.34e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.30e-05 1.72e-04 2.11e-05 1.43e-04 1.60e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.20e-05 2.60e-04 2.76e-05 2.05e-04 2.15e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.71e-05 2.57e-04 2.42e-05 1.88e-04 2.13e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.41e-05 1.74e-04 1.70e-05 1.30e-04 1.46e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.52e-05 2.03e-04 1.93e-05 1.56e-04 1.71e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.04e-05 2.67e-04 4.51e-05 2.39e-04 2.57e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.04e-04 2.90e-04 3.18e-05 3.45e-04 3.81e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.16e-04 2.30e-04 2.20e-05 1.75e-04 2.31e-04 case197 snem 2k 2k 9k 13k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.31e-05 1.50e-07 2.85e-05 4.51e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.60e-07 5.59e-05 4.30e-07 4.35e-05 6.40e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.60e-07 5.61e-05 4.20e-07 4.28e-05 6.39e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.60e-07 5.70e-05 5.30e-07 4.33e-05 6.39e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.65e-05 2.40e-04 2.61e-05 2.02e-04 2.16e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.01e-05 2.33e-04 2.73e-05 1.94e-04 2.15e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.67e-05 2.50e-04 2.57e-05 1.87e-04 2.14e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.30e-05 1.74e-04 1.71e-05 1.28e-04 1.48e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.98e-05 2.15e-04 2.81e-05 1.70e-04 2.01e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.44e-05 2.99e-04 4.81e-05 2.55e-04 2.71e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.73e-03 3.46e-04 4.53e-05 3.81e-04 4.18e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.15e-04 2.17e-04 2.14e-05 1.64e-04 2.21e-04 case300 ieee 2k 3k 13k 19k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.86e-05 2.30e-07 4.07e-05 6.44e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 2.90e-07 6.30e-05 6.10e-07 5.28e-05 8.17e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 1.90e-07 5.57e-05 6.20e-07 5.22e-05 8.15e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 2.90e-07 6.33e-05 7.50e-07 5.24e-05 8.29e-05 CUDA (N1) 4.50e-05 3.11e-04 2.63e-05 2.17e-04 2.25e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.39e-05 2.35e-04 3.01e-05 2.09e-04 2.26e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.75e-05 2.46e-04 2.45e-05 1.81e-04 2.05e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.43e-05 1.82e-04 1.75e-05 1.33e-04 1.49e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.42e-05 1.97e-04 1.92e-05 1.58e-04 1.75e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 4.87e-05 2.74e-04 4.40e-05 2.34e-04 2.48e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.99e-03 3.28e-04 3.25e-05 3.84e-04 4.10e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.12e-04 2.23e-04 2.17e-05 1.74e-04 1.93e-04 case240 pserc 3k 4k 14k 20k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.04e-05 3.30e-07 4.44e-05 7.02e-05 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.60e-07 6.40e-05 8.50e-07 5.44e-05 8.71e-05 CPU-8T (C3) 2.50e-07 6.39e-05 8.30e-07 5.47e-05 8.68e-05 CPU-16T (C3) 3.70e-07 6.51e-05 9.60e-07 5.48e-05 8.72e-05 CUDA (N1) 3.79e-05 1.71e-04 1.64e-05 1.31e-04 1.44e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.16e-05 2.54e-04 2.79e-05 2.04e-04 2.24e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.75e-05 2.38e-04 2.43e-05 1.89e-04 2.12e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.43e-05 1.84e-04 1.73e-05 1.36e-04 1.50e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.37e-05 2.02e-04 2.01e-05 1.57e-04 1.76e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.15e-05 2.99e-04 4.76e-05 2.53e-04 2.65e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.10e-04 3.16e-04 3.27e-05 3.56e-04 3.91e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.13e-04 2.14e-04 2.22e-05 1.83e-04 2.30e-04 case588 sdet 4k 6k 22k 31k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.14e-05 3.90e-07 6.84e-05 1.08e-04 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.40e-07 1.09e-04 8.40e-07 9.24e-05 1.41e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 2.20e-07 9.85e-05 8.50e-07 8.73e-05 1.53e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 3.30e-07 9.95e-05 9.50e-07 8.46e-05 1.54e-04 CUDA (N1) 3.62e-05 1.72e-04 1.82e-05 1.29e-04 1.47e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.26e-05 2.53e-04 2.96e-05 2.24e-04 2.38e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.90e-05 2.75e-04 2.80e-05 1.98e-04 2.31e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.47e-05 1.82e-04 1.82e-05 1.38e-04 1.58e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.85e-05 2.13e-04 2.40e-05 1.65e-04 1.78e-04 

91 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

AMDGPU (A1) 5.20e-05 2.73e-04 4.65e-05 2.45e-04 2.64e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.74e-04 6.63e-04 5.91e-05 8.36e-04 9.12e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.32e-04 1.69e-04 2.16e-05 1.50e-04 1.64e-04 case500 goc 4k 6k 23k 33k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.33e-05 4.80e-07 7.17e-05 1.14e-04 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.90e-07 1.16e-04 1.06e-06 9.54e-05 1.46e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 2.90e-07 1.06e-04 1.06e-06 9.86e-05 1.58e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 3.90e-07 9.63e-05 1.17e-06 8.70e-05 1.68e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.93e-05 2.64e-04 2.63e-05 1.63e-04 1.57e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.02e-05 2.49e-04 2.73e-05 2.06e-04 2.15e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.67e-05 2.39e-04 2.47e-05 1.83e-04 2.05e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.39e-05 1.84e-04 1.74e-05 1.38e-04 1.52e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.78e-05 2.09e-04 2.81e-05 1.79e-04 2.04e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.25e-05 2.76e-04 4.67e-05 2.54e-04 2.70e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.87e-04 6.95e-04 6.33e-05 8.74e-04 9.61e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.36e-04 2.04e-04 2.24e-05 1.67e-04 1.76e-04 case793 goc 5k 8k 29k 42k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 4.16e-05 4.80e-07 9.11e-05 1.43e-04 

CPU-4T (C3) 3.30e-07 1.21e-04 9.00e-07 1.09e-04 1.73e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 2.30e-07 1.64e-04 9.50e-07 1.45e-04 2.01e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 3.40e-07 1.35e-04 1.04e-06 1.10e-04 1.92e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.54e-05 1.84e-04 1.99e-05 1.46e-04 1.61e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.15e-05 2.50e-04 2.77e-05 2.06e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.09e-05 3.24e-04 2.60e-05 2.28e-04 2.31e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.45e-05 1.81e-04 1.71e-05 1.39e-04 2.01e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.41e-05 1.99e-04 2.15e-05 1.61e-04 1.86e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.11e-05 2.68e-04 4.35e-05 2.32e-04 2.57e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.26e-03 7.46e-04 5.13e-05 8.60e-04 9.54e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.32e-04 1.96e-04 2.15e-05 1.52e-04 2.07e-04 case1354 pegase 11k 17k 63k 91k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 9.23e-05 1.02e-06 2.02e-04 3.21e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 5.70e-07 2.25e-04 1.76e-06 2.45e-04 3.07e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.90e-07 3.12e-04 1.71e-06 3.73e-04 3.99e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.90e-07 2.05e-04 1.85e-06 2.41e-04 3.25e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.56e-05 1.84e-04 1.99e-05 1.38e-04 1.56e-04 

CUDA (N2) 5.00e-05 2.61e-04 3.07e-05 2.19e-04 2.49e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.80e-05 2.64e-04 2.45e-05 1.83e-04 2.09e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.44e-05 1.85e-04 1.75e-05 1.38e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.59e-05 2.03e-04 1.94e-05 1.64e-04 1.89e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.66e-05 2.77e-04 4.64e-05 2.47e-04 2.66e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.15e-04 3.84e-04 3.40e-05 5.30e-04 5.70e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.28e-04 2.11e-04 2.17e-05 1.57e-04 2.26e-04 case1888 rte 14k 21k 80k 115k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.18e-04 1.25e-06 2.57e-04 4.06e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 6.30e-07 2.35e-04 2.07e-06 2.61e-04 3.16e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 5.20e-07 2.98e-04 2.04e-06 3.32e-04 4.15e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 6.30e-07 2.92e-04 2.13e-06 3.91e-04 3.79e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.06e-05 2.44e-04 2.84e-05 1.89e-04 2.00e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.44e-05 2.59e-04 2.96e-05 2.11e-04 2.31e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.04e-05 2.74e-04 2.93e-05 2.06e-04 2.26e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.50e-05 1.83e-04 1.84e-05 1.45e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.89e-05 2.20e-04 2.37e-05 1.67e-04 1.88e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 6.48e-05 2.69e-04 4.31e-05 2.42e-04 2.61e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.00e-03 6.67e-04 4.26e-05 8.64e-04 9.15e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.33e-04 2.12e-04 2.23e-05 1.78e-04 2.21e-04 case1951 rte 15k 22k 83k 118k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.22e-04 1.37e-06 2.64e-04 4.16e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 7.30e-07 2.32e-04 2.37e-06 2.65e-04 3.43e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.40e-07 3.02e-04 2.30e-06 3.36e-04 4.06e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 7.30e-07 3.00e-04 2.46e-06 3.54e-04 4.07e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.03e-05 1.76e-04 1.72e-05 1.36e-04 1.43e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.24e-05 2.48e-04 2.72e-05 1.98e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.86e-05 2.67e-04 2.46e-05 1.87e-04 2.51e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.44e-05 1.81e-04 1.73e-05 1.37e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.44e-05 2.02e-04 2.15e-05 1.67e-04 1.90e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.11e-05 2.99e-04 4.71e-05 2.50e-04 2.65e-04 

92 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

oneAPI (I1) 1.07e-04 2.93e-04 3.19e-05 3.39e-04 3.73e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.18e-04 2.10e-04 2.19e-05 1.60e-04 2.10e-04 case1803 snem 15k 23k 88k 127k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.30e-04 1.23e-06 2.82e-04 4.49e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 5.40e-07 2.26e-04 1.89e-06 2.64e-04 3.49e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.20e-07 3.30e-04 1.92e-06 4.42e-04 4.49e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.30e-07 2.64e-04 1.98e-06 3.30e-04 4.63e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.75e-05 2.57e-04 2.54e-05 2.08e-04 2.19e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.10e-05 2.42e-04 2.77e-05 1.96e-04 2.15e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.70e-05 2.39e-04 2.52e-05 1.83e-04 2.06e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.35e-05 1.80e-04 1.73e-05 1.33e-04 2.01e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.70e-05 2.19e-04 2.66e-05 1.83e-04 1.93e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 5.25e-05 2.83e-04 4.65e-05 2.49e-04 2.66e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.45e-04 6.54e-04 4.26e-05 8.17e-04 8.97e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.34e-04 2.00e-04 2.20e-05 1.63e-04 2.06e-04 case2383wp k 17k 25k 92k 133k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.36e-04 1.44e-06 2.95e-04 4.66e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 6.70e-07 2.26e-04 2.29e-06 2.70e-04 3.21e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 5.90e-07 3.35e-04 2.29e-06 3.85e-04 4.31e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 6.70e-07 2.31e-04 2.44e-06 3.10e-04 3.93e-04 CUDA (N1) 3.88e-05 1.74e-04 1.78e-05 1.26e-04 1.47e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.41e-05 2.41e-04 2.92e-05 2.23e-04 2.48e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.93e-05 2.59e-04 2.82e-05 1.99e-04 2.39e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.52e-05 1.82e-04 1.84e-05 1.38e-04 2.01e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.80e-05 2.19e-04 2.43e-05 1.65e-04 1.91e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.85e-05 2.82e-04 4.70e-05 2.44e-04 2.53e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.09e-04 2.90e-04 3.25e-05 3.40e-04 3.79e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.29e-04 2.15e-04 2.20e-05 1.55e-04 2.17e-04 case2312 goc 17k 26k 95k 137k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.43e-04 1.34e-06 3.07e-04 4.86e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 4.70e-07 2.26e-04 2.04e-06 2.61e-04 3.33e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.30e-07 3.09e-04 2.02e-06 3.51e-04 4.24e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.20e-07 3.16e-04 2.13e-06 3.20e-04 4.21e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.58e-05 1.81e-04 2.12e-05 1.48e-04 1.56e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.40e-05 2.55e-04 2.77e-05 2.11e-04 2.19e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.73e-05 2.47e-04 2.51e-05 1.95e-04 2.18e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.37e-05 1.76e-04 1.72e-05 1.31e-04 2.01e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.85e-05 2.23e-04 2.66e-05 1.87e-04 2.07e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.15e-05 2.71e-04 4.46e-05 2.37e-04 2.54e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.73e-03 3.32e-04 3.29e-05 3.83e-04 4.16e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.34e-04 2.24e-04 2.20e-05 1.65e-04 2.15e-04 case2737sop k 19k 28k 104k 150k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.54e-04 1.44e-06 3.34e-04 5.27e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 5.10e-07 2.31e-04 2.11e-06 2.91e-04 3.39e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.00e-07 3.28e-04 2.09e-06 4.23e-04 4.61e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.00e-07 3.39e-04 2.23e-06 3.72e-04 4.46e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.38e-05 1.83e-04 2.21e-05 1.37e-04 1.57e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.77e-05 2.63e-04 2.95e-05 2.12e-04 2.40e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.87e-05 2.42e-04 2.46e-05 2.09e-04 2.33e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.51e-05 1.82e-04 1.74e-05 1.35e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.67e-05 2.11e-04 1.93e-05 1.63e-04 1.87e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 5.03e-05 2.82e-04 4.43e-05 2.35e-04 2.52e-04 oneAPI (I1) 4.05e-03 3.37e-04 3.28e-05 3.56e-04 4.14e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.33e-04 1.74e-04 2.21e-05 1.58e-04 2.10e-04 case2000 goc 19k 29k 113k 164k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.70e-04 1.46e-06 3.66e-04 5.86e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 5.40e-07 2.23e-04 2.13e-06 2.89e-04 3.45e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 4.60e-07 3.35e-04 2.14e-06 3.74e-04 4.37e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.40e-07 2.45e-04 2.27e-06 4.61e-04 4.62e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.61e-05 3.12e-04 2.51e-05 2.14e-04 2.44e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.56e-05 2.62e-04 2.98e-05 2.14e-04 2.36e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.85e-05 2.48e-04 2.47e-05 1.86e-04 2.16e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.45e-05 1.80e-04 1.74e-05 1.37e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.63e-05 2.09e-04 1.94e-05 1.60e-04 1.87e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 5.22e-05 2.78e-04 4.43e-05 2.50e-04 2.69e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.07e-04 2.85e-04 3.20e-05 3.33e-04 3.75e-04 

93 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.23e-04 2.01e-04 2.16e-05 1.74e-04 2.06e-04 case2736sp k 19k 28k 104k 150k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.54e-04 1.51e-06 3.33e-04 5.28e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 6.00e-07 2.55e-04 2.25e-06 2.89e-04 3.90e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 5.10e-07 3.33e-04 2.24e-06 4.14e-04 4.47e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.90e-07 3.27e-04 2.36e-06 4.16e-04 4.74e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.38e-05 1.94e-04 2.18e-05 1.44e-04 1.62e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.29e-05 2.48e-04 2.77e-05 2.01e-04 2.26e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.85e-05 2.46e-04 2.43e-05 1.95e-04 2.29e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.55e-05 1.81e-04 1.71e-05 1.36e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.41e-05 2.06e-04 2.14e-05 1.60e-04 1.88e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.60e-05 2.67e-04 4.52e-05 2.41e-04 2.61e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.40e-04 2.93e-04 3.30e-05 3.57e-04 3.88e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.30e-04 2.12e-04 2.19e-05 1.56e-04 2.15e-04 case2746wp k 20k 28k 105k 150k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.56e-04 1.75e-06 3.35e-04 5.29e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 8.50e-07 2.25e-04 2.81e-06 2.53e-04 3.74e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 7.50e-07 3.02e-04 2.81e-06 3.89e-04 3.73e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 8.40e-07 3.56e-04 2.91e-06 3.72e-04 4.52e-04 CUDA (N1) 3.87e-05 1.76e-04 1.69e-05 1.32e-04 1.44e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.29e-05 2.46e-04 2.83e-05 2.02e-04 2.21e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.93e-05 2.69e-04 2.49e-05 1.92e-04 2.23e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.63e-05 1.92e-04 1.74e-05 1.44e-04 2.03e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.52e-05 2.02e-04 2.15e-05 1.58e-04 1.91e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.06e-05 2.94e-04 4.69e-05 2.48e-04 2.66e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.28e-03 6.96e-04 5.52e-05 8.55e-04 1.04e-03 Metal (M1 *) 3.28e-04 2.02e-04 2.18e-05 1.54e-04 2.13e-04 case2746wop k 20k 29k 106k 151k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.56e-04 1.72e-06 3.38e-04 5.38e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 8.10e-07 2.25e-04 2.73e-06 2.56e-04 3.02e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 7.20e-07 3.17e-04 2.74e-06 3.91e-04 4.42e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 8.10e-07 3.41e-04 2.82e-06 3.79e-04 4.44e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.82e-05 2.24e-04 2.61e-05 1.86e-04 2.05e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.66e-05 2.78e-04 3.01e-05 2.22e-04 2.82e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.10e-05 2.79e-04 2.85e-05 2.06e-04 2.43e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.54e-05 1.83e-04 1.84e-05 1.37e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.86e-05 2.12e-04 2.16e-05 1.68e-04 1.87e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 7.15e-05 2.89e-04 4.54e-05 2.58e-04 2.72e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.69e-04 6.59e-04 5.54e-05 8.40e-04 9.10e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.35e-04 2.10e-04 2.19e-05 1.76e-04 2.24e-04 case3012wp k 21k 31k 114k 164k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.71e-04 1.76e-06 3.66e-04 5.75e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 7.60e-07 2.36e-04 2.72e-06 2.94e-04 3.52e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.70e-07 2.79e-04 2.71e-06 3.53e-04 3.97e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 7.70e-07 3.52e-04 2.86e-06 3.45e-04 5.96e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.37e-05 1.84e-04 2.14e-05 1.50e-04 1.53e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.52e-05 2.79e-04 3.03e-05 2.13e-04 2.33e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.91e-05 2.52e-04 2.48e-05 1.88e-04 2.09e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.58e-05 1.84e-04 1.76e-05 1.35e-04 2.03e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.82e-05 2.12e-04 1.92e-05 1.57e-04 1.87e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.51e-05 2.73e-04 4.46e-05 2.35e-04 2.53e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.08e-04 2.89e-04 3.25e-05 3.37e-04 3.73e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.37e-04 2.44e-04 2.22e-05 1.69e-04 2.08e-04 case3120sp k 22k 32k 118k 169k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.75e-04 1.70e-06 3.78e-04 6.00e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 6.50e-07 2.52e-04 2.50e-06 2.87e-04 3.32e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 5.50e-07 2.90e-04 2.45e-06 3.62e-04 5.00e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 6.50e-07 3.71e-04 2.57e-06 4.05e-04 4.65e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.86e-05 2.26e-04 2.62e-05 1.84e-04 2.00e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.65e-05 2.71e-04 2.93e-05 2.10e-04 2.34e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.03e-05 2.81e-04 2.81e-05 1.96e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.54e-05 1.86e-04 1.85e-05 1.45e-04 2.01e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.88e-05 2.14e-04 2.41e-05 1.67e-04 1.89e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 6.98e-05 2.81e-04 4.61e-05 2.50e-04 2.60e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.35e-04 2.88e-04 3.22e-05 3.44e-04 3.80e-04 

94 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.18e-04 2.09e-04 2.25e-05 1.53e-04 2.08e-04 case2848 rte 22k 32k 120k 172k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.82e-04 1.97e-06 3.89e-04 6.12e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 9.20e-07 2.68e-04 3.13e-06 2.90e-04 3.43e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 8.40e-07 2.66e-04 3.10e-06 3.00e-04 4.10e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 9.30e-07 3.56e-04 3.21e-06 3.71e-04 4.37e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.45e-05 1.89e-04 2.13e-05 1.56e-04 1.67e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.61e-05 2.64e-04 3.24e-05 2.16e-04 2.34e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.94e-05 2.43e-04 2.52e-05 1.95e-04 2.10e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.63e-05 1.84e-04 1.77e-05 1.35e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.76e-05 2.03e-04 1.95e-05 1.64e-04 1.86e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.02e-05 2.83e-04 4.42e-05 2.41e-04 2.58e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.66e-04 6.39e-04 4.22e-05 8.40e-04 8.87e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.35e-04 2.12e-04 2.22e-05 1.66e-04 2.11e-04 case2868 rte 22k 32k 121k 174k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.82e-04 2.04e-06 3.97e-04 6.17e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 9.90e-07 2.94e-04 3.31e-06 2.98e-04 3.45e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 9.00e-07 3.06e-04 3.27e-06 3.25e-04 4.22e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 9.90e-07 3.77e-04 3.37e-06 3.86e-04 6.31e-04 CUDA (N1) 3.99e-05 1.72e-04 1.76e-05 1.34e-04 1.50e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.58e-05 2.55e-04 3.06e-05 2.03e-04 2.28e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.99e-05 2.88e-04 2.89e-05 2.22e-04 2.35e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.58e-05 1.84e-04 1.85e-05 1.42e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.80e-05 2.14e-04 2.15e-05 1.71e-04 1.90e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.14e-05 2.94e-04 4.67e-05 2.43e-04 2.64e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.05e-03 6.68e-04 4.64e-05 8.89e-04 8.96e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.37e-04 1.95e-04 2.20e-05 1.58e-04 2.12e-04 case2853 sdet 23k 33k 125k 179k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.87e-04 2.38e-06 3.99e-04 6.33e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 1.34e-06 2.49e-04 4.01e-06 2.90e-04 3.44e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.26e-06 2.94e-04 4.06e-06 3.48e-04 4.20e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.33e-06 3.65e-04 4.13e-06 3.81e-04 4.46e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.47e-05 1.92e-04 2.22e-05 1.54e-04 1.63e-04 

CUDA (N2) 6.67e-05 3.01e-04 3.49e-05 2.28e-04 2.46e-04 CUDA (N3) 5.43e-05 2.72e-04 2.59e-05 1.95e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N4) 3.39e-05 1.75e-04 1.74e-05 1.31e-04 2.00e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.13e-05 2.35e-04 2.38e-05 1.74e-04 2.09e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.77e-05 2.74e-04 4.44e-05 2.39e-04 2.56e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.53e-04 6.13e-04 4.39e-05 8.22e-04 8.72e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.49e-04 1.94e-04 2.24e-05 1.56e-04 2.08e-04 case3022 goc 23k 35k 131k 188k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.98e-04 1.83e-06 4.21e-04 6.70e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 6.70e-07 2.80e-04 2.64e-06 3.67e-04 5.27e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 5.80e-07 2.66e-04 2.68e-06 3.62e-04 3.87e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 6.80e-07 3.73e-04 2.79e-06 5.71e-04 5.03e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.67e-05 2.34e-04 2.45e-05 1.99e-04 2.09e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.94e-05 2.74e-04 3.24e-05 2.28e-04 2.54e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.70e-05 2.41e-04 2.48e-05 1.92e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.41e-05 1.73e-04 1.73e-05 1.31e-04 2.01e-04 

CUDA (N6) 3.87e-05 2.42e-04 2.46e-05 1.90e-04 2.04e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.17e-05 2.80e-04 4.66e-05 2.47e-04 2.72e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.66e-03 3.39e-04 3.28e-05 3.81e-04 4.18e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.23e-04 2.06e-04 2.19e-05 1.58e-04 2.08e-04 case3375wp k 24k 36k 133k 190k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.01e-04 2.08e-06 4.25e-04 6.75e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 8.90e-07 2.86e-04 3.15e-06 3.72e-04 5.32e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 8.10e-07 2.94e-04 3.18e-06 2.98e-04 3.79e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 9.00e-07 3.85e-04 3.26e-06 4.61e-04 4.93e-04 CUDA (N1) 3.81e-05 1.68e-04 1.69e-05 1.41e-04 1.45e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.42e-05 2.57e-04 2.84e-05 2.06e-04 2.32e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.92e-05 2.49e-04 2.48e-05 1.87e-04 2.12e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.54e-05 2.00e-04 1.74e-05 1.40e-04 2.05e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.66e-05 2.11e-04 2.15e-05 1.57e-04 1.90e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.71e-05 2.85e-04 4.53e-05 2.38e-04 2.54e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.09e-04 2.97e-04 3.31e-05 3.49e-04 3.89e-04 

95 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.12e-04 2.27e-04 2.20e-05 1.66e-04 2.39e-04 case2742 goc 25k 38k 146k 211k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.22e-04 1.74e-06 4.76e-04 7.53e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 4.10e-07 2.58e-04 2.31e-06 3.77e-04 4.60e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 3.00e-07 2.91e-04 2.35e-06 4.47e-04 4.67e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 4.10e-07 3.28e-04 2.45e-06 5.56e-04 5.05e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.60e-05 2.53e-04 2.37e-05 2.01e-04 2.06e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.37e-05 2.62e-04 4.02e-05 2.61e-04 2.76e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.76e-05 2.43e-04 2.50e-05 1.92e-04 2.08e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.38e-05 1.74e-04 1.73e-05 1.38e-04 2.03e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.76e-05 2.23e-04 2.61e-05 1.82e-04 2.02e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 5.23e-05 2.78e-04 4.65e-05 2.44e-04 2.63e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.75e-04 6.83e-04 6.31e-05 9.22e-04 9.51e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.26e-04 2.09e-04 2.26e-05 1.67e-04 2.36e-04 case2869 pegase 25k 38k 144k 208k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.22e-04 2.16e-06 4.74e-04 7.46e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 9.30e-07 3.24e-04 3.27e-06 3.81e-04 5.09e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 8.50e-07 2.74e-04 3.32e-06 3.02e-04 3.62e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 9.40e-07 3.66e-04 3.43e-06 3.69e-04 5.59e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.51e-05 1.96e-04 2.18e-05 1.54e-04 1.57e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.28e-05 2.42e-04 2.81e-05 2.05e-04 2.23e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.91e-05 2.57e-04 2.50e-05 1.88e-04 2.12e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.62e-05 1.89e-04 1.75e-05 1.41e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.67e-05 2.12e-04 2.16e-05 1.62e-04 1.92e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.49e-05 2.70e-04 4.31e-05 2.31e-04 2.47e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.18e-04 4.97e-04 3.33e-05 5.93e-04 6.31e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.49e-04 2.31e-04 2.17e-05 1.67e-04 2.29e-04 case4661 sdet 35k 51k 191k 274k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 2.95e-04 3.00e-06 6.14e-04 9.74e-04 CPU-4T (C3) 1.21e-06 2.97e-04 4.55e-06 4.11e-04 5.31e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.11e-06 3.31e-04 4.51e-06 4.25e-04 4.90e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.20e-06 4.06e-04 4.62e-06 5.44e-04 6.19e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.62e-05 2.12e-04 2.20e-05 1.59e-04 1.82e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.60e-05 2.52e-04 2.97e-05 2.04e-04 2.28e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.96e-05 2.53e-04 2.52e-05 1.95e-04 2.17e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.70e-05 1.81e-04 1.79e-05 1.36e-04 2.06e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.72e-05 2.15e-04 1.98e-05 1.58e-04 1.86e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.56e-05 2.70e-04 4.42e-05 2.34e-04 2.54e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.54e-04 6.33e-04 4.34e-05 9.08e-04 8.84e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.21e-04 1.93e-04 2.22e-05 1.62e-04 2.26e-04 case3970 goc 35k 54k 208k 301k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.21e-04 2.65e-06 6.77e-04 1.07e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 7.60e-07 3.14e-04 3.54e-06 4.06e-04 5.35e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.80e-07 3.36e-04 3.57e-06 4.40e-04 4.91e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 7.60e-07 4.29e-04 3.68e-06 5.00e-04 6.01e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.32e-05 1.89e-04 2.34e-05 1.53e-04 1.59e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.65e-05 2.60e-04 2.93e-05 2.15e-04 2.25e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.97e-05 2.47e-04 2.47e-05 1.91e-04 2.10e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.47e-05 1.82e-04 1.76e-05 1.42e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.82e-05 2.21e-04 1.95e-05 1.57e-04 1.87e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.44e-05 2.74e-04 4.56e-05 2.44e-04 2.69e-04 oneAPI (I1) 4.03e-03 3.30e-04 3.30e-05 3.64e-04 4.08e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.32e-04 2.19e-04 2.19e-05 1.55e-04 2.20e-04 case4020 goc 37k 57k 218k 316k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.38e-04 2.70e-06 7.13e-04 1.13e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 7.20e-07 3.01e-04 3.59e-06 4.01e-04 5.36e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.30e-07 3.24e-04 3.53e-06 4.55e-04 5.02e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 7.30e-07 4.46e-04 3.65e-06 6.47e-04 6.44e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.44e-05 1.98e-04 2.01e-05 1.45e-04 1.64e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.74e-05 2.95e-04 2.76e-05 2.07e-04 2.29e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.90e-05 2.60e-04 2.47e-05 1.92e-04 2.19e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.50e-05 1.95e-04 1.74e-05 1.37e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 4.07e-05 2.25e-04 2.39e-05 1.84e-04 1.92e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.77e-05 2.72e-04 4.43e-05 2.36e-04 2.54e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.78e-04 6.99e-04 6.50e-05 8.72e-04 9.39e-04 

96 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.18e-04 2.22e-04 2.16e-05 1.70e-04 2.56e-04 case4917 goc 38k 57k 213k 306k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.34e-04 3.02e-06 6.91e-04 1.09e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.00e-06 2.99e-04 4.22e-06 4.16e-04 5.45e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 9.10e-07 3.94e-04 4.26e-06 5.24e-04 4.82e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.02e-06 4.40e-04 4.36e-06 5.37e-04 6.26e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.82e-05 2.74e-04 2.71e-05 2.15e-04 2.26e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.61e-05 2.47e-04 3.03e-05 2.04e-04 2.24e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.04e-05 2.55e-04 2.81e-05 2.03e-04 2.27e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.61e-05 1.82e-04 1.85e-05 1.42e-04 2.03e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.83e-05 2.10e-04 2.36e-05 1.64e-04 1.85e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 6.87e-05 2.81e-04 4.50e-05 2.42e-04 2.61e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.01e-03 6.66e-04 4.37e-05 8.64e-04 9.25e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.39e-04 2.17e-04 2.18e-05 1.59e-04 2.24e-04 case4601 goc 39k 60k 226k 326k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.52e-04 2.89e-06 7.34e-04 1.17e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 7.70e-07 2.98e-04 3.83e-06 4.18e-04 5.47e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 7.00e-07 3.39e-04 3.91e-06 4.55e-04 5.25e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 8.00e-07 4.45e-04 4.00e-06 5.42e-04 8.59e-04 CUDA (N1) 3.98e-05 1.77e-04 1.85e-05 1.23e-04 1.51e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.57e-05 2.61e-04 3.00e-05 2.09e-04 2.30e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.04e-05 2.60e-04 2.83e-05 2.02e-04 2.24e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.50e-05 1.90e-04 1.85e-05 1.39e-04 2.02e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.77e-05 2.14e-04 2.14e-05 1.64e-04 1.91e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.07e-05 2.87e-04 4.70e-05 2.38e-04 2.64e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.70e-04 6.55e-04 5.49e-05 8.19e-04 9.07e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.16e-04 2.24e-04 2.23e-05 1.79e-04 2.25e-04 case4837 goc 41k 64k 243k 352k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.79e-04 2.96e-06 7.93e-04 1.27e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 6.80e-07 3.04e-04 3.83e-06 4.21e-04 5.54e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.10e-07 3.36e-04 3.87e-06 4.42e-04 5.70e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 6.90e-07 4.54e-04 3.89e-06 6.16e-04 6.50e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.45e-05 2.25e-04 2.55e-05 1.96e-04 2.28e-04 CUDA (N2) 4.25e-05 2.53e-04 2.80e-05 2.05e-04 2.22e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.83e-05 2.42e-04 2.51e-05 1.84e-04 2.07e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.48e-05 1.76e-04 1.73e-05 1.31e-04 2.01e-04 CUDA (N6) 4.17e-05 2.22e-04 2.71e-05 1.85e-04 1.95e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 6.69e-05 2.72e-04 4.41e-05 2.35e-04 2.56e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.42e-04 6.20e-04 4.40e-05 8.15e-04 8.82e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.35e-04 2.20e-04 2.18e-05 1.55e-04 2.30e-04 case4619 goc 43k 66k 254k 368k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 3.96e-04 3.05e-06 8.33e-04 1.33e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 7.20e-07 3.06e-04 3.91e-06 4.21e-04 5.53e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.20e-07 3.59e-04 4.03e-06 4.87e-04 5.53e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 7.30e-07 4.68e-04 4.03e-06 6.59e-04 8.80e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.66e-05 1.93e-04 2.17e-05 1.39e-04 1.56e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.55e-05 2.60e-04 2.84e-05 2.20e-04 2.46e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.01e-05 2.69e-04 2.52e-05 2.00e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.59e-05 1.82e-04 1.74e-05 1.42e-04 2.06e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.56e-05 2.11e-04 1.94e-05 1.64e-04 1.86e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.53e-05 2.81e-04 4.50e-05 2.41e-04 2.53e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.33e-03 7.23e-04 5.16e-05 8.84e-04 9.57e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.18e-04 2.04e-04 2.19e-05 1.75e-04 2.39e-04 case5658 epigrids 49k 75k 284k 411k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 4.40e-04 3.57e-06 9.31e-04 1.48e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 8.90e-07 3.58e-04 4.80e-06 5.58e-04 7.18e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 7.80e-07 4.08e-04 4.66e-06 7.26e-04 7.33e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 8.80e-07 4.94e-04 4.76e-06 6.70e-04 6.94e-04 CUDA (N1) 3.93e-05 1.84e-04 1.70e-05 1.27e-04 1.40e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.55e-05 2.53e-04 2.90e-05 2.07e-04 2.32e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.99e-05 2.54e-04 2.49e-05 1.87e-04 2.16e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.59e-05 1.84e-04 1.74e-05 1.43e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.70e-05 1.95e-04 2.13e-05 1.67e-04 1.96e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.85e-05 2.84e-04 4.55e-05 2.38e-04 2.55e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.42e-04 2.90e-04 3.28e-05 3.42e-04 3.79e-04 

97 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.46e-04 1.89e-04 2.20e-05 1.66e-04 2.28e-04 case6468 rte 50k 76k 284k 409k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 4.48e-04 3.56e-06 9.36e-04 1.47e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 7.80e-07 3.87e-04 4.52e-06 5.66e-04 7.18e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.60e-07 4.17e-04 4.60e-06 7.12e-04 8.77e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 7.80e-07 5.20e-04 4.70e-06 6.98e-04 8.60e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.36e-05 1.91e-04 2.33e-05 1.53e-04 1.61e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.61e-05 2.47e-04 2.94e-05 2.05e-04 2.24e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.16e-05 2.60e-04 2.49e-05 2.01e-04 2.07e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.65e-05 1.81e-04 1.74e-05 1.36e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.77e-05 2.11e-04 1.92e-05 1.60e-04 1.90e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.71e-05 2.82e-04 4.43e-05 2.31e-04 2.51e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.09e-04 3.02e-04 3.23e-05 3.37e-04 3.73e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.47e-04 2.32e-04 2.22e-05 1.59e-04 2.40e-04 case6495 rte 50k 76k 285k 411k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 4.49e-04 3.92e-06 9.41e-04 1.48e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.14e-06 3.89e-04 5.31e-06 5.72e-04 7.25e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.04e-06 4.30e-04 5.36e-06 6.30e-04 7.04e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.14e-06 5.04e-04 5.48e-06 6.08e-04 7.18e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.04e-05 1.72e-04 1.83e-05 1.36e-04 1.46e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.61e-05 2.48e-04 3.08e-05 2.02e-04 2.25e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.10e-05 2.58e-04 2.84e-05 1.99e-04 2.24e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.69e-05 1.82e-04 1.87e-05 1.38e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 4.09e-05 2.10e-04 2.19e-05 1.65e-04 1.90e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.13e-05 2.86e-04 4.69e-05 2.45e-04 2.63e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.11e-04 3.02e-04 3.30e-05 3.39e-04 3.79e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.46e-04 2.19e-04 2.30e-05 1.62e-04 2.34e-04 case6470 rte 50k 76k 285k 410k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 4.49e-04 4.01e-06 9.39e-04 1.47e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.29e-06 3.88e-04 5.79e-06 5.63e-04 7.24e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.18e-06 4.26e-04 5.60e-06 6.22e-04 7.84e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.26e-06 5.36e-04 5.73e-06 6.73e-04 7.54e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.52e-05 1.78e-04 2.04e-05 1.54e-04 1.57e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.46e-05 2.43e-04 2.83e-05 1.97e-04 2.18e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.97e-05 2.51e-04 2.56e-05 2.01e-04 2.07e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.58e-05 1.76e-04 1.78e-05 1.32e-04 2.03e-04 CUDA (N6) 4.29e-05 2.27e-04 2.75e-05 1.82e-04 2.09e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.03e-05 2.97e-04 4.66e-05 2.48e-04 2.67e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.61e-03 3.52e-04 3.40e-05 3.82e-04 4.24e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.18e-04 2.20e-04 2.22e-05 1.58e-04 2.42e-04 case6515 rte 51k 76k 286k 411k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 4.53e-04 3.93e-06 9.42e-04 1.48e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.15e-06 3.99e-04 5.34e-06 5.31e-04 7.28e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.07e-06 3.63e-04 5.50e-06 5.25e-04 6.58e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.17e-06 5.20e-04 5.47e-06 6.78e-04 7.01e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.49e-05 1.93e-04 2.28e-05 1.42e-04 1.54e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.52e-05 2.57e-04 2.95e-05 2.15e-04 2.30e-04 CUDA (N3) 3.90e-05 2.55e-04 2.49e-05 1.94e-04 2.13e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.75e-05 1.84e-04 1.77e-05 1.37e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.63e-05 2.09e-04 2.16e-05 1.63e-04 1.94e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.99e-05 2.84e-04 4.56e-05 2.42e-04 2.59e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.11e-04 2.91e-04 3.45e-05 3.50e-04 3.94e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.26e-04 2.21e-04 2.23e-05 1.61e-04 2.33e-04 case7336 epigrids 62k 95k 362k 522k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 5.70e-04 4.65e-06 1.19e-03 1.89e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.16e-06 3.88e-04 6.28e-06 5.46e-04 7.54e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 1.05e-06 3.85e-04 6.20e-06 4.93e-04 6.92e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.15e-06 5.65e-04 6.14e-06 7.57e-04 8.37e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.53e-05 2.08e-04 2.24e-05 1.65e-04 1.76e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.70e-05 2.50e-04 2.86e-05 2.08e-04 2.28e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.17e-05 2.66e-04 2.50e-05 1.86e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.81e-05 1.82e-04 1.80e-05 1.36e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.81e-05 2.12e-04 1.96e-05 1.67e-04 1.87e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.80e-05 2.87e-04 4.49e-05 2.39e-04 2.54e-04 oneAPI (I1) 4.00e-03 3.85e-04 3.34e-05 3.63e-04 4.03e-04 

98 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.44e-04 2.13e-04 2.23e-05 1.65e-04 2.48e-04 case10000 goc 77k 112k 420k 603k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 6.61e-04 7.92e-06 1.37e-03 2.16e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.14e-05 4.43e-04 2.76e-05 6.54e-04 9.58e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 9.25e-06 4.67e-04 3.05e-05 6.70e-04 8.08e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 5.03e-06 4.69e-04 1.68e-05 6.52e-04 9.34e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.28e-05 1.91e-04 2.10e-05 1.41e-04 1.57e-04 

CUDA (N2) 7.03e-05 2.43e-04 2.90e-05 2.08e-04 2.28e-04 CUDA (N3) 6.46e-05 2.46e-04 2.43e-05 1.83e-04 2.07e-04 CUDA (N4) 4.38e-05 1.87e-04 1.80e-05 1.36e-04 2.07e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.74e-05 2.04e-04 1.97e-05 1.61e-04 1.91e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.66e-05 2.79e-04 4.58e-05 2.40e-04 2.60e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.58e-04 6.32e-04 4.23e-05 8.41e-04 8.91e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.14e-04 1.93e-04 2.27e-05 1.75e-04 2.74e-04 case8387 pegase 79k 119k 457k 659k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 7.40e-04 7.08e-06 1.54e-03 2.41e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.14e-05 5.16e-04 3.01e-05 6.69e-04 9.92e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 9.25e-06 5.26e-04 3.16e-05 6.75e-04 8.36e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 6.68e-06 6.73e-04 2.46e-05 8.84e-04 9.85e-04 CUDA (N1) 5.58e-05 2.31e-04 2.62e-05 2.12e-04 2.12e-04 CUDA (N2) 6.25e-05 2.33e-04 2.76e-05 1.96e-04 2.19e-04 CUDA (N3) 5.62e-05 2.41e-04 2.46e-05 1.82e-04 2.07e-04 CUDA (N4) 3.72e-05 1.81e-04 1.77e-05 1.35e-04 2.06e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.65e-05 2.21e-04 2.57e-05 1.92e-04 2.03e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 6.65e-05 2.70e-04 4.40e-05 2.33e-04 2.59e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.55e-04 6.77e-04 6.46e-05 8.78e-04 9.41e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.15e-04 2.13e-04 2.16e-05 1.74e-04 2.72e-04 case9591 goc 84k 131k 497k 720k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 7.89e-04 5.63e-06 1.65e-03 2.61e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 7.40e-07 4.43e-04 6.83e-06 6.64e-04 9.57e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 6.40e-07 4.48e-04 6.46e-06 6.69e-04 8.02e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 7.30e-07 6.47e-04 7.13e-06 8.80e-04 9.75e-04 CUDA (N1) 4.07e-05 1.77e-04 1.83e-05 1.39e-04 1.43e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.49e-05 2.60e-04 2.82e-05 2.15e-04 2.39e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.02e-05 2.66e-04 2.47e-05 1.88e-04 2.20e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.70e-05 1.93e-04 1.74e-05 1.45e-04 2.05e-04 CUDA (N6) 3.76e-05 1.91e-04 2.15e-05 1.66e-04 1.93e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.14e-05 2.84e-04 4.70e-05 2.45e-04 2.53e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.33e-03 7.44e-04 5.20e-05 9.05e-04 9.58e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.15e-04 2.22e-04 2.17e-05 1.89e-04 2.68e-04 case9241 pegase 86k 131k 503k 726k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 8.15e-04 7.88e-06 1.71e-03 2.66e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.15e-05 5.34e-04 3.06e-05 6.96e-04 9.98e-04 CPU-8T (C3) 9.15e-06 5.22e-04 2.96e-05 7.24e-04 8.67e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 6.11e-06 6.96e-04 2.02e-05 9.43e-04 1.21e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.96e-05 2.78e-04 2.73e-05 2.18e-04 2.22e-04 CUDA (N2) 6.38e-05 2.48e-04 3.01e-05 2.05e-04 2.25e-04 CUDA (N3) 5.76e-05 2.58e-04 2.50e-05 2.15e-04 2.48e-04 CUDA (N4) 3.80e-05 1.95e-04 1.89e-05 1.37e-04 2.05e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.52e-05 2.20e-04 2.28e-05 1.63e-04 1.91e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 6.47e-05 2.68e-04 4.54e-05 2.39e-04 2.57e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.16e-04 4.14e-04 3.21e-05 5.26e-04 5.48e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.16e-04 2.28e-04 2.23e-05 1.77e-04 2.74e-04 case10192 epigrids 90k 139k 532k 770k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 8.46e-04 6.46e-06 1.76e-03 2.79e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.20e-06 5.08e-04 8.02e-06 7.52e-04 1.11e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.10e-06 4.87e-04 8.20e-06 7.34e-04 9.66e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.18e-06 6.53e-04 8.45e-06 9.20e-04 1.07e-03 CUDA (N1) 4.52e-05 1.84e-04 2.09e-05 1.47e-04 1.57e-04 

CUDA (N2) 4.39e-05 2.40e-04 2.82e-05 2.02e-04 2.22e-04 CUDA (N3) 4.00e-05 2.40e-04 2.53e-05 2.06e-04 2.18e-04 CUDA (N4) 2.67e-05 1.76e-04 1.79e-05 1.32e-04 2.04e-04 CUDA (N6) 4.30e-05 2.27e-04 2.78e-05 1.90e-04 2.02e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.70e-05 2.72e-04 4.43e-05 2.36e-04 3.06e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.39e-04 6.16e-04 4.91e-05 8.55e-04 8.79e-04 

99 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.13e-04 2.13e-04 2.35e-05 1.94e-04 2.69e-04 case10480 goc 97k 151k 579k 838k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 9.29e-04 7.76e-06 1.93e-03 3.05e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.28e-06 5.02e-04 1.00e-05 7.57e-04 1.13e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.18e-06 4.80e-04 9.75e-06 7.73e-04 9.82e-04 CPU-16T (C3) 1.26e-06 6.58e-04 9.92e-06 1.00e-03 1.12e-03 CUDA (N1) 4.63e-05 1.76e-04 1.87e-05 1.31e-04 1.47e-04 

CUDA (N2) 6.50e-05 2.55e-04 3.11e-05 2.08e-04 2.28e-04 CUDA (N3) 6.01e-05 2.73e-04 2.89e-05 2.04e-04 2.22e-04 CUDA (N4) 3.85e-05 1.86e-04 1.84e-05 1.39e-04 2.06e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.73e-05 2.20e-04 2.11e-05 1.64e-04 1.93e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.12e-05 2.83e-04 4.64e-05 2.42e-04 2.61e-04 oneAPI (I1) 3.03e-03 6.62e-04 4.45e-05 8.67e-04 9.42e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.37e-04 2.31e-04 2.21e-05 1.58e-04 2.67e-04 case13659 pegase 117k 171k 650k 932k CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.07e-03 1.46e-05 2.22e-03 3.44e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.23e-05 6.38e-04 3.60e-05 8.33e-04 1.23e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 9.68e-06 6.21e-04 4.62e-05 8.57e-04 1.07e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 1.29e-05 7.85e-04 5.14e-05 1.11e-03 1.27e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.38e-05 1.88e-04 2.02e-05 1.45e-04 1.61e-04 

CUDA (N2) 7.17e-05 2.65e-04 2.92e-05 2.11e-04 2.39e-04 CUDA (N3) 6.16e-05 2.53e-04 2.45e-05 1.97e-04 2.28e-04 CUDA (N4) 4.25e-05 2.01e-04 1.77e-05 1.48e-04 2.09e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.72e-05 2.12e-04 2.19e-05 1.63e-04 1.95e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.61e-05 2.69e-04 4.33e-05 2.31e-04 2.60e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.06e-04 2.82e-04 3.12e-05 3.46e-04 3.75e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.52e-04 2.22e-04 2.20e-05 2.37e-04 4.13e-04 case20758 epigrids 179k 275k 1.0M 1.5M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.68e-03 1.63e-05 3.47e-03 5.49e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 5.44e-06 7.62e-04 2.60e-05 1.05e-03 1.73e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 7.92e-06 7.01e-04 4.04e-05 1.13e-03 1.60e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 7.67e-06 8.02e-04 4.83e-05 1.31e-03 1.65e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.72e-05 2.13e-04 2.56e-05 2.05e-04 2.12e-04 CUDA (N2) 6.38e-05 2.38e-04 2.76e-05 2.03e-04 2.25e-04 CUDA (N3) 5.97e-05 2.46e-04 2.48e-05 1.97e-04 2.08e-04 

CUDA (N4) 3.87e-05 1.74e-04 1.78e-05 1.32e-04 2.08e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.55e-05 2.35e-04 2.73e-05 1.89e-04 2.08e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.57e-05 2.90e-04 4.48e-05 2.51e-04 2.69e-04 oneAPI (I1) 7.44e-03 3.25e-04 3.21e-05 3.80e-04 4.17e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.47e-04 1.99e-04 2.22e-05 2.38e-04 4.47e-04 case19402 goc 180k 282k 1.1M 1.6M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.75e-03 1.46e-05 3.63e-03 5.79e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.54e-06 7.80e-04 1.85e-05 1.26e-03 1.73e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.43e-06 6.48e-04 1.73e-05 1.07e-03 1.50e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 1.54e-06 7.78e-04 1.72e-05 1.32e-03 1.63e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.81e-05 2.29e-04 2.47e-05 1.68e-04 1.90e-04 

CUDA (N2) 7.22e-05 2.44e-04 2.99e-05 2.09e-04 2.31e-04 CUDA (N3) 7.42e-05 2.50e-04 2.59e-05 1.85e-04 2.09e-04 CUDA (N4) 4.94e-05 1.84e-04 1.80e-05 1.41e-04 2.11e-04 CUDA (N6) 6.18e-05 2.09e-04 1.97e-05 1.63e-04 1.95e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.61e-05 2.76e-04 4.69e-05 2.48e-04 2.54e-04 oneAPI (I1) 1.11e-04 2.87e-04 3.36e-05 3.37e-04 3.72e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.43e-04 2.21e-04 2.20e-05 2.41e-04 4.50e-04 case24464 goc 203k 314k 1.2M 1.7M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.92e-03 1.73e-05 3.99e-03 6.39e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.18e-05 8.50e-04 4.05e-05 1.40e-03 2.16e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 4.58e-06 5.82e-04 2.71e-05 9.79e-04 1.40e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 7.98e-06 8.29e-04 4.32e-05 1.40e-03 1.73e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.87e-05 2.83e-04 2.79e-05 2.08e-04 2.28e-04 CUDA (N2) 6.65e-05 2.46e-04 3.04e-05 2.11e-04 2.31e-04 CUDA (N3) 6.12e-05 2.63e-04 2.79e-05 1.99e-04 2.22e-04 CUDA (N4) 4.08e-05 1.86e-04 1.89e-05 1.42e-04 2.14e-04 CUDA (N6) 5.93e-05 2.16e-04 2.22e-05 1.67e-04 1.93e-04 

AMDGPU (A1) 6.43e-05 2.75e-04 4.50e-05 2.40e-04 2.59e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.09e-04 2.86e-04 3.16e-05 3.73e-04 3.80e-04 

100 Table 10: (continued) 

instance n m nnzj nnzh backend obj cons grad jac hess 

Metal (M1 *) 3.54e-04 2.35e-04 2.27e-05 2.61e-04 4.64e-04 case30000 goc 209k 308k 1.1M 1.6M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 1.80e-03 2.04e-05 3.70e-03 5.90e-03 CPU-4T (C3) 1.15e-05 8.42e-04 4.14e-05 1.32e-03 2.09e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 7.39e-06 5.78e-04 4.66e-05 1.03e-03 1.44e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 1.18e-05 8.69e-04 5.15e-05 1.43e-03 1.73e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.02e-05 1.73e-04 1.85e-05 1.32e-04 1.42e-04 

CUDA (N2) 7.93e-05 2.55e-04 2.77e-05 2.09e-04 2.26e-04 CUDA (N3) 6.97e-05 2.87e-04 2.43e-05 1.97e-04 2.21e-04 CUDA (N4) 4.52e-05 1.93e-04 1.78e-05 1.39e-04 2.15e-04 CUDA (N6) 6.23e-05 2.01e-04 2.18e-05 1.60e-04 1.97e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 7.51e-05 2.95e-04 4.75e-05 2.47e-04 2.77e-04 oneAPI (I1) 2.11e-04 2.93e-04 3.19e-05 3.49e-04 3.90e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.59e-04 2.07e-04 2.30e-05 2.46e-04 4.56e-04 case78484 epigrids 675k 1.0M 4.0M 5.7M CPU (C3) 2.00e-08 8.62e-03 6.14e-05 1.51e-02 2.25e-02 CPU-4T (C3) 1.56e-05 3.00e-03 8.79e-05 4.43e-03 5.76e-03 CPU-8T (C3) 1.15e-05 1.74e-03 9.50e-05 3.13e-03 3.45e-03 CPU-16T (C3) 1.82e-05 1.65e-03 1.16e-04 3.38e-03 2.88e-03 CUDA (N1) 5.20e-05 1.98e-04 2.24e-05 1.48e-04 1.84e-04 

CUDA (N2) 7.96e-05 2.43e-04 2.86e-05 2.58e-04 4.69e-04 CUDA (N3) 7.93e-05 2.47e-04 2.43e-05 1.87e-04 2.99e-04 CUDA (N4) 5.57e-05 1.83e-04 1.81e-05 2.04e-04 4.88e-04 CUDA (N6) 6.90e-05 2.13e-04 1.99e-05 1.75e-04 3.49e-04 AMDGPU (A1) 6.76e-05 2.78e-04 4.58e-05 2.39e-04 2.59e-04 oneAPI (I1) 7.64e-03 3.02e-04 3.18e-05 3.64e-04 7.72e-04 Metal (M1 *) 3.93e-04 7.50e-04 2.97e-05 7.74e-04 1.49e-03 Government License: The submitted manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Ar-gonne”). Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory, is operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The U.S. Government retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevoca-ble worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display pub-licly, by or on behalf of the Government. The Department of Energy will provide public ac-cess to these results of federally sponsored re-search in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan. http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan. 

101