Title: A Multi-Agent Framework for Zero-Dimensional Reduced-Order Model Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.10994v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 01:36:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
# A Multi-Agent Framework for Zero-Dimensional Reduced-Order Model Planning 

# Bingteng Sun 1,2 , Hao Yin 1,2 †, Yiling Chen 1,2 †, Renjie Xiao 1,2 ,Lei Xie 1,2 , Shanyou Wang 1,2 , Ruonan Wang 1,2 , Shubao Chen 1,2 ,Qingzong Xu 1,2 , Lin Lu 6, Qiang Du 1,2,3,4,5* , Junqiang Zhu 1,2 

> 1

Advanced Gas Turbine Laboratory, Institute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. 

> 2

National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Advanced Light-duty Gas-turbine, Beijing, 100190, China. 

> 3

, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. 

> 4

, Qingdao Institute of Aeronautical Technology, Qingdao, China. 

> 5

, Nanjing Future Energy System Research Institute, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 211135, China. 

> 6

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, 72 Binhai Road, Qingdao, 266237, Shandong Province, China. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): duqiang@iet.cn; Contributing authors: sunbingteng@iet.cn; yinhao@iet.cn; chenyiling@iet.cn; xiaorenjie@iet.cn; xielei@iet.cn; wangshanyou@iet.cn; wangruonan@iet.cn; chenshubao@iet.cn; xuqingzong@iet.cn; llu@sdu.edu.cn; zhujunqiang24@sina.com; 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Abstract 

High-end complex equipment generally adopts multi-dimensional design work-flows, among which the development of zero-dimensional reduced-order models (0D ROMs) serves as the core of the entire design process. Currently, this model planning process heavily relies on manual experience, facing bottlenecks such as a limited exploration space for network topologies and long iteration peri-ods. Even with the introduction of traditional optimization methods like the Genetic Algorithm (GA), the process is often restricted to local parameter opti-mization. In recent years, Large Language Model (LLM) agents, equipped with 

1arXiv:2607.10994v1 [cs.LG] 13 Jul 2026 powerful decision-making and tool-use capabilities, have demonstrated the abil-ity to rapidly explore massive sample spaces, bringing new opportunities to engineering design. Although the Chain of Thought (CoT) and Reason and Act (ReAct) frameworks significantly improve the reliability of agent reasoning, and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) technology effectively overcomes domain knowledge barriers, a single agent still falls short when dealing with the long-horizon and highly coupled nature of complex 0D ROM planning tasks. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a Zero-dimensional reduced-order model CO-Planning framework based on a multi-Agent architecture (Z-COPA). This framework is equipped with a Symbolic Action Graph Engine (SAGE) and a MILP-Guided Navigation (MGN) optimizer. Its core innovation lies in proposing a dedicated graph representation method to accurately describe the 0D flow network topology, thereby innovatively converting the traditional empirical model planning process into a rigorous graph structure optimization problem. We validated the forward and inverse design capabilities as well as generaliza-tion performance of Z-COPA on three types of cases, including two real aircraft engine secondary-air system design cases, two IEEE power-distribution recon-figuration benchmarks, and two water-distribution network design benchmarks. The results show that our multi-agent system achieves superior task completion quality, obtaining the best performance in both forward and reverse design of air systems. It also cuts the active power loss of the IEEE 69-bus distribution net-work by 55.46% and reduces the cost for the Two-Loop water network by 90.45%. The proposal of Z-COPA disrupts the traditional 0D model planning paradigm, providing a brand-new technical approach for exploring a broader topological space and achieving highly automated, globally optimal air system architectures.  

> Keywords: Large Language Model Agent, Zero-Dimensional Reduced-Order Model Planning, Retrieval-Augmented Generation, Topology-Parameter CO-Optimization, Aero-Engine Air Systems Design

# 1 Introduction 

In modern engineering, the efficient design and optimization of complex systems usu-ally involves 0-dimensional, 1-dimensional, 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional modeling and simulation processes, which require a delicate balance between computational cost and physical accuracy[1–3]. To address this, the engineering community widely adopts a highly abstract and representative modeling approach: simplifying complex three-dimensional (3D) physical systems into 0-dimensional (0D) low-order reduced models [4]. By discretizing spatially continuous physical processes into networks composed of nodes and links, these 0D models focus on the macroscopic transfer of mass, momen-tum, and energy within the system, thereby significantly enhancing computational efficiency while preserving core physical characteristics [5]. Such 0D engineering design problems, abstracted from complex physical phenomena, are ubiquitous and highly representative across various disciplines. For instance, the dynamic planning of urban water networks and pipeline systems in municipal and energy engineering [6], as well as the design of aero-engine Secondary Air Systems(SAS) and thermodynamic cycles 2in the aerospace sector [7][8], fundamentally rely on such 0D network models. Con-sequently, the 0D optimization design problems abstracted from complex real-world challenges across diverse fields serve not only as the cornerstone for early-stage con-figuration selection, performance evaluation, and global optimization of engineering systems, but also stand as a universal and critically important core research topic in modern engineering design. To address the aforementioned 0D optimization design problems, traditional solu-tion strategies can be broadly classified into three categories. The first and currently most mainstream paradigm is manual empirical design, which relies heavily on domain-specific expert knowledge, heuristics, and the personal experience of engi-neers [9, 10]. The second category comprises gradient-free optimization algorithms, such as Genetic Algorithms (GA) and Bayesian Optimization (BO) [11–13], which explore the design space without requiring derivative information. The third category involves gradient-based optimization algorithms [14–16], which leverage mathemat-ical gradients to efficiently converge upon optimal solutions in continuous design spaces. However, despite their widespread application, a fundamental limitation per-sists in both gradient-free and gradient-based approaches: they function merely as passive computational tools. These algorithms lack the cognitive capacity to actively comprehend the physical connotations, underlying mechanisms, and implicit design requirements of the engineering problems [17–19]. Consequently, they require extensive human intervention to formulate objective functions and constraints, which severely hinders the transition towards fully autonomous and intelligent engineering design. Traditional optimization algorithms have inherent limitations in semantic under-standing and intent recognition, making it difficult to directly translate high-level human design intentions into low-level engineering parameters. In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs), with their exceptional natural language processing and log-ical reasoning capabilities, have gradually emerged as a crucial bridge to close this gap [20]. Driven by this trend, the single-agent problem-solving paradigm was first applied to complex tasks. Beyond the foundational Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [21] prompting, researchers have successively proposed classic frameworks such as ReAct (Reasoning and Acting) [22], Toolformer [23], and Reflexion [24]. These advancements endow sin-gle agents with the abilities to invoke external tools, interact with environments, and perform self-reflection and error correction. However, when confronted with highly complex engineering design and optimization tasks, single agents often fall short in global task planning and long-horizon reasoning. They are prone to reasoning inter-ruptions or error accumulation, making it challenging for them to independently tackle complex problems with deep domain dependencies [25]. To break through the capability bottlenecks of single agents, the research paradigm has begun to evolve towards multi-agent collaborative architectures. Recently, multi-agent frameworks represented by CAMEL [26], ChatDev [27], AutoGen [28], and MetaGPT [29] have emerged. By employing refined role definitions, task decomposi-tion, and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), these frameworks allow multiple specialized agents to engage in role-playing, debate, and cross-validation, thereby significantly improving the efficiency of planning and solving complex problems. A representative case study, SciSciGPT, proposes a ”Research Manager-Expert” 3collaborative architecture and an Agent Capability Maturity Model for the field of scientometrics, enabling the automated generation of full-process research pro-totypes—ranging from literature comprehension and data extraction to iterative visualization[30]. Although multi-agent architectures demonstrate immense potential in logical orchestration and task breakdown, a pure text-based agent network relying solely on LLMs remains insufficient for rigorous engineering optimization. On the one hand, the parametric knowledge of LLMs carries the risk of hallucinations and strug-gles to cover deep, domain-specific expert experience. On the other hand, they lack an intrinsic perception of physical laws, making it impossible to guarantee the physical feasibility of the generated solutions. Therefore, to achieve truly reliable intelligent design, it is imperative to introduce Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) technology to dynamically acquire and align with domain-specific expert knowledge. From the early standard RAG [31] to Self-RAG [32], which features on-demand retrieval and self-critique capabilities, and further to Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation (GraphRAG) [33], which can handle complex entity relationships, the evolution of RAG technologies provides agents with increas-ingly precise external knowledge anchors. Building upon this, deeply coupling physical simulation engines to provide agents with real physical feedback and closed-loop valida-tion [34] has become an inevitable trend. SimulRAG enables the retrieval of numerical information from scientific simulators, translates numerical simulations into textual context via a generalized retrieval interface, and employs a statement-level verification method based on uncertainty estimation[35]. This integrated architecture is emerg-ing as the frontier paradigm for solving complex engineering optimization problems. Meanwhile, ontology-driven RAG technology is evolving toward fully collaborative intelligence[36]. It not only leverages LLMs for the semi-automatic construction, maintenance and link prediction of ontologies, but also explores adopting ontologies as an external reasoning space[37]. With path search algorithms such as Think-on-Graph guiding models to perform complex multi-hop logical reasoning, this technology delivers verifiable and interpretable decision support for rigorous fields including biomedicine and engineering design[38]. Specifically, Hyper-RAG captures complex entity associations beyond-pairwise correlations—within a knowledge base through hypergraph modeling[39]. To address the above problems, we introduce Z-COPA, an autonomous multi-agent framework designed to tackle both forward and inverse 0-dimensional reduced-order model (0D ROM) planning problems. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we formulate 0D ROM planning as a unified constrained topology-parameter co-optimization problem. Let a candidate design be defined as x = ( T , P), where T denotes the flow-network topology and P represents the associated continuous engineering parameters. Given the target performance Rtarget and physical constraints g(x) ≤ 0, Z-COPA aims to find the optimal configuration x∗ that minimizes the mismatch L between the simulator’s physical response S(T , P) and the desired target: 

x∗ = arg min   

> T,P

L(S(T , P), Rtarget ) s.t. g(T , P) ≤ 0Within this formulation, the forward problem represents a specific deterministic case where the topology T is completely predefined by input evidence (e.g., existing 4Fig. 1 The Z-COPA workflow illustrating the dual-mode operation: (a) forward design path, where topology and parameters are given and performance is evaluated; (b) inverse design path, where performance targets are specified and the system searches for feasible topology–parameter configurations. 

CAD drawings). The agents solely focus on iteratively refining the parameter vector 

P over the fixed graph to safely meet performance thresholds. Conversely, the inverse problem addresses blank-slate scenarios by activating the full multi-agent generative loop. It autonomously constructs valid topologies T from scratch and jointly optimizes 

P, transforming traditional manual trial-and-error into an explicit, automated graph-structure exploration. Furthermore, L is solved using the 0D ROM graph physics-informed neural network solver (Z-GPSolver). Our contributions are as follows: 

• Pioneering Multi-Agent Framework: We propose Z-COPA, the first multi-agent collaborative architecture tailored specifically for 0D ROM planning. This framework operationalizes LLM agents to automate the complex network design and topology exploration process under strict physical and engineering constraints. 

• Symbolic Action Graph Engine (SAGE): We introduce a novel ontology-driven multimodal Retrieval-Augmented Generation module: SAGE. This compo-nent empowers the agents to deeply comprehend complex physical problems, accurately identify key optimization variables, and intelligently guide the optimization direction through domain-specific knowledge grounding. 

• MILP-Guided Navigation (MGN) Algorithm: We develop the MGN algorithm, a hybrid optimization strategy that bridges discrete topological search with con-tinuous parameter tuning. By leveraging Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) to navigate the complex non-convex search space and Z-GPSolver for 5efficient solution cases, MGN effectively avoids local optima and accelerates convergence. 

• Empirical State-of-the-Art: Extensive evaluations demonstrate that Z-COPA achieves state-of-the-art performance across diverse 0D ROM planning tasks. It significantly outperforms traditional manual design heuristics and strong numerical baselines in both optimization quality and success rate, while substantially reducing the wall-clock time required for complex system design. 

# 2 Results and discussion 

# 2.1 Overview of Z-COPA   

> Fig. 2 Architecture of the proposed Z-COPA framework. The three primary agents (Supervi-sor, Representation, Design) are coordinated by a meta-level harness. Solid lines indicate the forward design data flow; dashed lines indicate the inverse design loop. The SAGE module supplies domain knowledge to all agents.

This work proposes Z-COPA, as shown in Fig. 2, a universal LLM-driven multi-agent intelligent framework dedicated to complex zero-dimensional optimization design scenarios, including engine air system collaborative design, regional power grid layout optimization, and urban integrated water pipeline network scheduling design. To fundamentally break through the above practical bottlenecks in industrial design, Z-COPA integrates three core original innovations throughout the whole process: modular collaborative multi-agent architecture, ontology-driven multi-modal RAG 6knowledge parsing mechanism, and MGN optimization algorithm, which jointly sup-port the whole-link autonomous design from demand perception to scheme iteration and performance verification. The overall functional deployment of Z-COPA relies on a unified scheduling multi-agent system, which independently matches two standardized engineering design paths according to different initial design conditions, and realizes full-process intelligent coordination of all functional modules and professional engineering tools: 

Forward planning. This design path requires an existing initial zero-dimensional design scheme. The system can directly activate the independent optimization branch of Route B and use the established initial design parameters as the input bench-mark for the entire process. Relying on the efficient iterative optimization capability of the MGN hybrid optimization algorithm, the embedded professional core engi-neering tool zero-dimensional graph PINN solver is invoked in real time throughout the iteration process. The solver efficiently calculates real-time performance responses of multiple groups of perturbed design parameters, feeds back accurate performance evaluation indicators to the MGN algorithm, realizes rapid convergence and high-precision polishing of design parameter groups under fixed topological conditions, and finally outputs optimal design parameter configurations that meet all engineering performance indicators. 

Inverse planning. This design pipeline targets blank engineering design scenarios without any initial zero-dimensional design prototypes. Relying on the core capabili-ties of ontology-driven multimodal RAG, the agent collaboratively invokes a suite of professional engineering tools, including a full-condition query tool for DWG drawings and a visual feature perception model for engineering drawings. It extracts three types of information from raw engineering drawings and historical design databases: geomet-ric boundary conditions, topological constraint relationships, and multi-dimensional physical information containing implicit engineering requirements. The agent then independently generates feasible initial design schemes with complete topological frameworks. All structured perception data and prototype schemes are subsequently delivered to the downstream optimization Route B, enabling integrated autonomous operation covering full topological scheme generation, overall layout matching, and joint multi-objective parameter optimization. All tool scheduling, data interaction and design logic iteration of Z-COPA are man-aged and constrained by the underlying engineering knowledge base engine. The entire process is recorded in JSON format. The whole framework forms a complete closed-loop automatic correction mechanism: if the performance detection link verifies that the output scheme fails to meet industrial standard thresholds and actual operating requirements, the system will automatically backtrack the design link, intelligently adjust RAG perception depth or MGN iteration intensity, and restart the design optimization cycle. Compared with traditional manual empirical design, Z-COPA effectively decouples the strong dependence on designer experience, realizes standard-ized, mechanism-aware and high-precision autonomous iteration of zero-dimensional engineering whole-process design, and has strong engineering application promotion value in the field of fluid machinery and energy power system design. 7Hardware and Software Configuration: All experiments were conducted on a local workstation equipped with an Intel Core i7-14700F processor, 32 GB of DDR5 system memory and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Ti GPU with 8 GB of GDDR6 memory. The experimental system was implemented in Python 3.12 and used Microsoft AutoGen AgentChat 0.7.5 as the core multi-agent framework, with autogen-agentchat, autogen-core and autogen-ext all fixed at version 0.7.5. Owing to the limited local GPU memory, language and vision-language inference was performed through the remote Kimi API using the multimodal, tool-calling kimi-k2.6 model. Tool-access permissions were isolated according to agent roles: optimization, retrieval and solution-verification tools were exposed only to the agents responsible for the cor-responding functions, thereby reducing unnecessary tool exposure and constraining agent behaviour boundaries. 

Dataset: We evaluated the proposed method on six network-design cases spanning aero-engine secondary-air systems, power distribution systems and water distribution systems. The two SAS cases were derived from real CAD-driven secondary-air-system design workflows rather than synthetic graph instances. In the forward-design task, the CAD/VLM pipeline first extracts the airflow topology and converts it into a solver-ready request, after which optimization is performed mainly over design parameters on a fixed topology. In the inverse-design task, the same CAD/VLM-to-solver conversion flow produces a validated branch-region solver artifact, and the optimization jointly modifies topology and parameters under secondary-air-system physical objectives. These two cases represent realistic engineering airflow design settings in which geom-etry interpretation, component grounding, solver materialization and multi-objective feasibility constraints are tightly coupled. For public benchmarks, we used two radial distribution-network reconfiguration cases, IEEE case33 and IEEE case69, and two water-distribution network design cases, Two-Loop and New York Tunnels. The IEEE case33 and case69 feeders are widely used distribution-network reconfiguration benchmarks from the Baran–Wu feeder family [40]. Candidate power-grid solutions were represented as switching actions over nor-mally closed sectional lines and normally open tie switches, and were evaluated under strict radiality, connectivity, AC power-flow convergence, voltage-bound and line-loading constraints, with active power loss as the primary objective. The Two-Loop benchmark is a classical least-cost water-distribution design problem [41, 42], whereas the New York Tunnels benchmark is a larger water-network expansion problem com-monly used to assess pipe-sizing and parallel-pipe design methods [42]. Water-network candidates were evaluated through EPANET/WNTR hydraulic simulation, with dis-crete pipe-diameter or parallel-pipe decisions scored by construction cost, resilience where applicable, hydraulic convergence, source reachability and minimum pressure/-head constraints. Together, these cases test whether the method transfers from real industrial CAD-derived SAS design tasks to established physical-network benchmarks with nontrivial topology, solver and constraint structure. 

Benchmark Tasks: We designed a two-tier evaluation mechanism comprising basic static tasks and functional dynamic tasks. Basic tasks examine the reliabil-ity of individual agents and tools, whereas functional tasks evaluate whether these capabilities can be coordinated into solver-backed co-planning workflows. 8Basic tasks test individual framework components: 1. Preprocessing. The system is evaluated on its ability to convert heterogeneous engineering inputs into structured, model-ready representations. Depending on the task, these inputs may include drawings, diagrams, tabular speci-fications, existing network descriptions, or configured solver contexts. The evaluation covers component recognition, geometric and attribute extrac-tion, spatial or connectivity-relation identification, boundary-condition parsing, and consistency checks between the perceived structure and the downstream zero-dimensional model. 2. SAGE retrieval. The retrieval module is evaluated on six categories of technical questions: terminology grounding, component-function explanation, parameter semantics, constraint interpretation, failure-mode diagnosis, and optimiza-tion guidance. Each category is assessed from two perspectives: agent-facing diagnostic retrieval and user-facing explanatory retrieval. 3. Solver interface. Solver-side agents are evaluated for numerical accuracy, con-vergence behavior, runtime efficiency, and API fidelity. These tests verify that solver requests, candidate artifacts, objective metrics, and validation reports can be exchanged without altering the physical meaning of the design task. 

Functional tasks assess coordinated co-planning performance: 1. Forward design. Given an engineering model, drawing, or configured solver-ready topology, Z-COPA performs preprocessing and context verification, constructs an auditable 0D ROM solver request, and executes a parameter-search–solver-validation loop. The goal is to improve task-specific objective metrics while preserving solver feasibility, boundary conditions, and physical constraints. 2. Inverse design. Given incomplete engineering inputs, target requirements, and boundary constraints, Z-COPA first uses ontology-guided retrieval and engineering perception tools to extract structured information about bound-aries, topology, components, and requirements. It then exposes legal topology and parameter actions and performs topology–parameter co-optimization with solver-backed validation. If a candidate fails constraint or performance checks, the workflow backtracks to the perception or action stage. 

Evaluation metrics: To compare Z-COPA across heterogeneous engineering cases, we evaluate each method along three dimensions: 

• Task completion: Success Rate (SR) measures whether a run completes the required agent–tool workflow and returns a solver-validated design with objective values extracted from executable artifacts. We use this permissive criterion to compare methods at a common executable endpoint and to assess ReAct/CoT orchestration reliability rather than final design quality. 

• Solution quality: Objective-wise Improvement measures the relative gain over the initial input design, using relative reduction for minimized objectives and relative increase for maximized objectives. The Total Score is computed as a weighted sum of the configured objective-improvement ratios. 9• Computational efficiency: Runtime measures the elapsed wall-clock time required to complete the workflow and produce the final solver-backed result. The Total Score is used only for reporting and cross-baseline comparison; it is not used as the internal optimization objective for NSGA-II, MGN, or domain-specific optimizers. Detailed metric definitions are provided in Appendix A.5. 

Baselines: We compared Z-COPA with four ablated configurations to isolate the contributions of SAGE retrieval, reasoning format, multi-agent decomposition and optimization policy. These baselines assess whether the target tasks can be solved by a single monolithic agent, whether SAGE improves domain grounding and the identi-fication of optimization variables, and whether changing the search policy affects the quality of solver-backed designs. In these zero-dimensional engineering tasks, conven-tional optimization algorithms provide the numerical search backbone, but they do not parse heterogeneous design inputs, identify domain-specific variables, coordinate solver validation or generate auditable design evidence on their own. Therefore, we did not include these traditional algorithms in the comparison baselines, but instead focused on comparing two classic agent frameworks: ReAct and Compact CoT. (1) Single Agent + ReAct + NSGA-II: A monolithic ReAct-style agent that receives the task query and executes the auditable optimization workflow using NSGA-II for candidate generation. The agent has no access to SAGE retrieval. This configuration serves as the single-agent, retrieval-free evolutionary optimization baseline. (2) Single Agent + ReAct + SAGE + NSGA-II: The same monolithic ReAct agent as in (1), augmented with SAGE retrieval for domain-knowledge grounding. The optimizer, solver interface, candidate-evaluation budget and final scoring pro-tocol are identical to those in (1). This configuration isolates the effect of adding retrieval under the same single-agent ReAct setting. (3) Single Agent + Compact CoT + SAGE + NSGA-II: A monolithic agent with the same tool access as in (2), but using a compact structured-rationale prompting format rather than ReAct. The agent provides concise planning and evidence summaries before tool decisions, while retaining the same SAGE access, NSGA-II candidate-generation policy, solver interface and evaluation protocol. This configuration isolates the effect of the reasoning format under a retrieval-enabled single-agent setting. (4) Multi-Agent + SAGE + NSGA-II: A role-decomposed multi-agent configu-ration that separates planning, context analysis, candidate-batch reflection, design optimization, solver validation and final evidence auditing. SAGE retrieval is avail-able as an optional domain-knowledge source. Candidate generation uses the same NSGA-II policy, solver interface and candidate-evaluation budget as the single-agent NSGA-II baselines. This configuration evaluates the effect of multi-agent decomposition while keeping the optimizer family fixed. (5) Multi-Agent + SAGE + MGN: This configuration uses the multi-agent work-flow in (4), but replaces NSGA-II with MGN for candidate generation, using the MGN configuration reported in Appendix B.1. MGN can search mixed topology– parameter candidates through GA-style population search with MILP-guided 10 recombination or local branching. All other components are held fixed, isolating the effect of the optimizer family. 

# 2.2 Case Studies 

To further validate the utility of Z-COPA, we applied it to three real-world zero-dimensional engineering design settings, including: (1) aero-engine SAS direct forward optimization planning, (2) aero-engine SAS inverse topology-parameter planning, and (3) physical-network design optimization covering power-grid reconfiguration and water-distribution design. 

2.2.1 SAS Direct forward optimization design 

The Forward Design Case evaluates whether the proposed multi-agent workflow can convert an uploaded secondary air system drawing into a solver-backed multi-objective design optimization process. Starting from the SAS design drawing, the system extracts components, flow paths and converts them into structured data, and then initiates a forward-design task to search for improved system configurations. The opti-mization seeks a Pareto trade-off among seal leakage, total bleed-flow consumption and pressure nonuniformity, while preserving solver convergence, source–sink connectivity, seal pressure margin and critical boundary-flow constraints. This case therefore tests both the physical quality of the optimized design and the ability of the agent work-flow to plan, retrieve domain evidence, construct a solver-ready network and execute a constrained optimization loop. As shown in Fig. 3a and detailed in Appendix A.2, the workflow begins with a natural-language query that specifies the uploaded SAS drawings as the design source and requests a forward multi-objective optimization process. The Planner first identi-fies the task as an SAS forward-design problem and decomposes it into six executable stages: goal parsing, SAGE evidence retrieval, agent-work routing, solver-ready net-work construction, multi-objective optimization and Pareto configuration evaluation. SAGE is used as a source of domain evidence rather than as a substitute for solver evaluation. In the retrieval trace shown in Fig. 3d, the query is scoped to domain:sas ;the returned objective family is sas forward bleed reduction multi objective ,and the retrieved preferred keys indicate physically meaningful variables such as flow area, discharge coefficient and flow coefficient. These variables define the physically meaningful design space exposed to the solver-backed optimization process. The quantitative comparison in Fig. 3b reports objective-specific improve-ment scores for the three SAS metrics: seal leakage kg s , total flow kg s and 

pressure cv . The internal NSGA-II and MGN optimizers operate directly on this three-objective minimization vector without objective weights; the scalar total score is computed only for reporting and constraint-first final selection. The MGN design evidence in Fig. 3c further shows how the selected configuration differs from the ini-tial design at the parameter level and how these changes translate into solver-backed objective values. A run is counted as successful only when candidate generation, candi-date selection and final solver validation are all supported by successful tool evidence, 11 Fig. 3 Workflow and results of the Forward Design Case. (a) Input query and Planner-generated workflow. The query asks the system to parse the uploaded SAS drawings, extract components and flow paths, and initiate a forward-design process for multi-objective Pareto opti-mization. The planning trace contains six steps: parsing the SAS forward-design goal, retrieving SAGE domain evidence, decomposing and routing agent work, building a solver-ready flow net-work, executing multi-objective design optimization, and evaluating Pareto-optimal configurations. 

(b) Quantitative results of the compared baselines, including runtime, success rate, objective-specific improvement scores and the reporting-time total score. (c) MGN-optimized design evidence, showing the modified SAS configuration, parameter-level changes and the corresponding solver-backed objec-tive values. (d) SAGE retrieval evidence used by the agent workflow. The retrieval queries are scoped to the SAS domain and return the objective family sas forward bleed reduction multi objective ,as well as preferred optimization variables such as area, discharge coefficient and flow coefficient. 

12 ensuring that the reported improvement is based on executable SAS design artifacts rather than text-only reasoning. 

2.2.2 SAS Inverse topology-parameter design 

The SAS inverse design case evaluates whether the proposed multi-agent work-flow can start from a user query and uploaded SAS design drawings with specified inlet–outlet boundaries, and generate improved configurations through a constrained reverse-design process. Unlike the forward-design case, this task allows both continu-ous parameter updates and topology-editing actions within the target branch region. The optimization searches for Pareto-improving configurations over seal leakage, total flow consumption and pressure nonuniformity, while preserving solver convergence, source–sink connectivity, critical seal pressure margin and boundary-flow constraints. This case therefore tests whether the agent workflow can move beyond parameter tuning and produce solver-backed topology–parameter design alternatives. As shown in Fig. 4a, the workflow starts from a user query rather than from a predefined optimization script. The query provides the uploaded SAS drawings, inlet– outlet boundary conditions and reverse-design requirements. The Planner identifies the task as an SAS inverse topology–parameter design problem and decomposes it into six executable stages: reverse-goal parsing, SAGE evidence retrieval, agent-work routing, solver-ready network construction, joint topology–parameter optimization and Pareto configuration evaluation. SAGE provides domain evidence for feasible variables, action directions and safe bounds, whereas final design validity is determined only by solver-backed candidate evaluation. The quantitative comparison in Fig. 4b reports the same averaged objective-specific improvement scores as in the forward-design case: seal leakage kg s ,

total flow kg s and pressure cv . B5 achieves the highest overall score in this inverse-design setting because the MGN-based multi-agent workflow identifies a mixed topology–parameter solution rather than only retuning continuous parameters. In the selected design, the agent removes a redundant hole element in the branch region, sub-stantially reducing seal leakage. This improvement entails a small trade-off: total flow and pressure nonuniformity increase slightly, but the final candidate remains solver-converged and satisfies all hard physical constraints. This behaviour is consistent with a constrained Pareto trade-off rather than a single-objective improvement. The topology–parameter evidence in Fig. 4c shows the design mechanism under-lying this result. The selected candidate removes the redundant hole element without adding new elements or edges, yielding a genuine topology simplification. Around this topology edit, the workflow retunes neighbouring branch parameters, including flow area, clearance, discharge coefficient and flow coefficient, to preserve feasibility. The resulting configuration reduces seal leakage by approximately 3.15%, while the total-flow and pressure-nonuniformity objectives show only minor degradation. Thus, the B5 result demonstrates that the workflow can identify a solver-backed inverse-design alternative that simplifies the topology and improves the dominant leakage objective under multi-objective constraints. 13 Fig. 4 Workflow and results of the SAS inverse topology–parameter design case. (a) User query and Planner-generated workflow. The workflow starts from a user query specifying the uploaded SAS drawings, inlet–outlet boundaries and reverse-design requirements. The Planner decomposes the task into six stages: parsing the SAS reverse-design goal, retrieving SAGE domain evidence, decomposing and routing agent work, building a solver-ready flow network, executing joint topology– parameter optimization, and evaluating Pareto-optimal configurations. (b) Averaged quantitative results of the compared baselines, including runtime, success rate, objective-specific improvement scores and the reporting-time total score. (c) MGN-optimized topology–parameter design evidence. The selected solver-backed design removes a redundant hole element in the branch region and jointly retunes neighbouring flow-area, clearance, discharge-coefficient and flow-coefficient parameters. 

A run is counted as successful only when candidate generation, explicit candidate selection and final solver validation are all supported by tool evidence. This require-ment ensures that the reported inverse-design result corresponds to an executable SAS topology–parameter configuration rather than a text-only design suggestion. 14 2.2.3 Physical Network Optimization Case 

The Power–Water Case tests whether the proposed agent-orchestrated workflow trans-fers from secondary air systems to two infrastructure domains with distinct physics: power-distribution reconfiguration and water-network pipe sizing. The evaluation cov-ers two power-grid benchmarks, IEEE case33 and IEEE case69, and two water-network benchmarks, Two-Loop and New York Tunnels. In the power-grid tasks, the system searched for radial switching configurations that reduced active power loss while pre-serving voltage and loading feasibility. In the water-network tasks, it searched over pipe-sizing or parallel-pipe design decisions to reduce cost, or to improve cost–resilience trade-offs, while preserving hydraulic feasibility and pressure/head constraints. These cases tested whether SAGE-grounded domain knowledge and MGN-based solver-backed search could expose domain-specific design variables without requiring the language agent to implement the power-flow or hydraulic solver. Fig. 5a shows that the highlighted power and water tasks began from natural-language engineering queries, but the agent was not asked to solve the physical optimization problem directly. Instead, SAGE provided domain-grounded evidence about variables, constraints, solver interfaces and evaluation metrics, while MGN sup-plied a solver-backed search process. This division was needed because the two domains used different executable representations: radial switch actions with AC power-flow validation for IEEE distribution networks, and pipe-sizing or parallel-pipe design vectors with EPANET/WNTR hydraulic validation for water networks. The agent performed task interpretation, evidence retrieval, tool routing and candidate selec-tion, whereas MGN performed candidate generation, materialization and fresh solver scoring. Fig. 5c summarizes the four public infrastructure benchmarks used in this transfer study. On the power-grid side, the workflow reached 144.54 kW on IEEE case33 and 98.93 kW on IEEE case69. These correspond to gaps of 3.58% and 0.32% to their reference baselines. On the water-network side, it reached 420,000 on Two-Loop and 54.973M on New York Tunnels, with gaps of 0.24% and 0.09%, respectively. These results show that the same SAGE–MGN protocol exposed and optimized distinct design variables across electrical and hydraulic network problems. Fig. 5b details the selected IEEE case69 reconfiguration. The search explored radial topology edits, closing candidate tie lines and opening section lines to preserve radi-ality. The resulting configuration reduced active power loss from 222.10 kW to 98.93 kW, a 55.46% reduction, while retaining solver-backed checks for voltage and loading feasibility. The New York Tunnels result is shown in Fig. 5d,e. The selected live design added a small set of parallel pipes to the existing tunnel network and reached a construction cost of 54.973M with network resilience of 0.503. Relative to the initial 294.156M design, this corresponds to an 81.31% cost reduction. The result remained within 0.09% of the 54.926M reference cost. The frontier plot further shows that the live result lay close to the reference cost–resilience trade-off curve, with a cost gap of 0.047M to the reference cost. Hydraulic feasibility was evaluated through EPANET/WNTR. Together, these cases support the central claim that Z-COPA transfers an agent-orchestrated, solver-grounded optimization workflow across heterogeneous engineering 15 Fig. 5 Cross-domain optimization results for power-grid reconfiguration and water-network pipe sizing. (a) Task queries for the two highlighted domains. In the IEEE 69-bus power-distribution case, SAGE grounds the topology-edit action space, solver interface, candidate schema and physical evaluation metrics. In the New York Tunnels water-network case, SAGE grounds the parallel-pipe design variables, EPANET/WNTR interface, candidate schema and hydraulic evaluation metrics. (b) Solver-backed power-grid reconfiguration evidence for the selected IEEE 69-bus design. The optimized topology closes tie lines and opens section lines to form a radial configuration with lower active power loss while maintaining voltage and loading feasibility. (c) Quantitative comparison across four cross-domain benchmarks: IEEE case33, IEEE case69, Two-Loop and New York Tunnels. The workflow approaches the corresponding reference baselines in all four settings, with gaps of 3.58%, 0.32%, 0.24% and 0.09%, respectively. (d) Water-network design evidence for the New York Tunnels case, showing the selected parallel-pipe additions over the existing tunnel network. (e) Cost– resilience frontier for the New York Tunnels case. The selected live result lies close to the reference frontier, with a cost gap of 0.047M to the reference cost while satisfying hydraulic feasibility. 

16 domains, with executable optimization authority residing in solver-backed MGN search rather than text-only agent reasoning. 

# 3 Conclusions 

This work presents Z-COPA, a novel multi-agent collaborative framework tailored specifically for 0D ROM planning of complex thermal engineering systems. Built upon LLM-driven multi-agent orchestration, ontology-driven multimodal RAG mod-ule and MGN optimizer, Z-COPA innovatively transforms traditional empirical 0D network design into rigorous graph structure optimization, and supports both forward parameter optimization and inverse topology-parameter co-planning tasks. Extensive validations on three representative engineering scenarios, including real aero-engine SAS design cases, IEEE 69-bus power distribution network and Two-Loop/New York Tunnels water-distribution benchmarks, demonstrate that Z-COPA outperforms single-agent paradigms and conventional numerical optimization baselines remarkably in task completion rate, design solution quality and computational effi-ciency. Experimental results show that Z-COPA achieves the highest target total score of 13.08 in aero-engine air system forward design, and reduces seal leakage by 3.15% in inverse topology–parameter optimization; meanwhile, it lowers the active power loss of IEEE 69-bus distribution network by 55.46%, and reduces 90.45% cost in the water-network Two-Loop task, demonstrating varying degrees of improvement compared to the optimal baseline. It effectively expands the topological exploration space of 0D flow networks, realizes high automation and global optimal design of system architec-tures, and the embedded Z-GPSolver also significantly accelerates numerical solving speed while maintaining high physical simulation accuracy. Meanwhile, the framework decouples the strong reliance on designers’ empirical experience, breaking the bottle-necks of long iteration cycle and limited topology exploration existing in traditional manual and single optimization methods. Despite the superior performance of Z-COPA in autonomous 0D ROM planning and cross-domain generalization, it still has a potential limitation: the inherent accu-racy constraint of zero-dimensional simulation itself. Although Z-COPA can achieve reliable topology parsing, knowledge grounding, constrained optimization and closed-loop verification via multi-agent collaboration, ontology RAG and MGN algorithm, its final design quality fundamentally depends on the accuracy of underlying 0D model-ing formulas. When key physical models such as the flow resistance and heat transfer of labyrinth teeth and rotating cavities in aero-engine air systems are overly simpli-fied, the optimized topology and parameter configurations generated by Z-COPA may still deviate from the actual physical performance targets. In future work, we will further iterate and optimize the Z-COPA framework. The core direction is to introduce 3D simulation information into the multi-agent archi-tecture, construct a real-time correction mechanism for 0D reduced-order models by fusing high-fidelity 3D physical field data. This can compensate the accuracy defi-ciency of simplified 0D empirical models, further enhance the physical rationality and practical engineering applicability of optimized design results, and ultimately build 17 a more complete, high-precision and closed-loop intelligent optimization system for complex thermal equipment network design. 

# 4 Methods 

# 4.1 Z-COPA Multi-Agent Architecture 

As shown in Fig. 2, we construct a multi-agent framework for engineering drawing comprehension and flow-network optimization design. The core idea is to decompose complex design tasks into three complementary processes: representation, execution, and reflection. The representation process recovers a computable graph-structured state from engineering drawings and design evidence; the execution process then per-forms physical solving, candidate generation, and optimization iteration on that graph structure; the reflection process continuously evaluates the quality of outputs from both representation and execution, deciding whether the task should proceed, roll back, or switch paths. Rather than using a large language model as a black box that directly generates the final design, we limit the role of agents to structured-state con-struction, judgment, tool invocation, and iterative correction, thereby improving the interpretability and traceability of the design process. The system consists of a main agent and several sub-agents, whose implementation modules are organized as independently inspectable runtime, routing, solver, retrieval, benchmark and result components, as shown in Appendix A.3. Following the manager protocol specified in Appendix A.1, the main agent assumes cognitive control during design: it decides whether the current task should enter the representation path, the execution path, or trigger reflection, based on user objectives, drawing evidence, phys-ical constraints, and current solver feedback. Sub-agents assume specific functions, including drawing parsing, network generation, candidate structure generation, and physical solving. Route A on the left corresponds to the representation process, respon-sible for converting unstructured or weakly structured drawings into a computable graph-structured state; Route B on the right corresponds to the execution process, responsible for candidate generation, physical solving, optimization search, and feed-back iteration on the graph-structured state. The two paths are connected through a unified structured state stream, enabling the system to share the same interme-diate representation between forward-design and reverse-design tasks. The reflection mechanism spans both paths, evaluating the acceptability of the design state after each execution cycle and redirecting the task back to Route A for representational completion when necessary. 

4.1.1 Main agent and planner 

The main agent serves as the cognitive control centre of the framework, responsible for maintaining the global design state and coordinating task scheduling among sub-agents. It does not directly perform drawing parsing or numerical solving; instead, it delegates specific operations to the appropriate sub-agents based on the current design evidence. 18 The planner is the core decision module of the main agent. Its inputs comprise user design objectives, a snapshot of the current structured state stream, and eval-uation reports from the reflection mechanism; its output is a task execution plan specifying which sub-agent to activate next, the intermediate objective to achieve, and fallback strategies upon failure. The planner maintains a dynamic task queue, prioritiz-ing tasks according to representational adequacy, execution feasibility, and constraint satisfaction rates. The planner operates at three levels. At the path-selection level, it determines whether the current task should enter Route A for representational completion, Route B for solving and optimization, or trigger the reflection mechanism for state assessment. At the resource-scheduling level, it coordinates concurrent execution of multiple sub-agents while avoiding write conflicts on the shared state stream. At the exception-handling level, when a sub-agent reports failure or anomalous output, the planner analyses the failure type and decides whether to retry, degrade, or switch strategy. Separating the Planner from the main agent makes the cognitive control logic of the framework modular. The main agent maintains the global state and user objectives, whereas the Planner generates execution plans from the state stream and reflection outputs. Sub-agents then carry out specific parsing, solving and validation tasks, and write their results back to the shared state stream. This design decouples planning deci-sions, tool execution and state updates. When the design task or constraint conditions change, the system can adjust the Planner’s control strategy without rewriting the sub-agent implementations, thereby improving extensibility across different engineering design scenarios. 

4.1.2 Representation agents 

Route A is the representation path in our framework. Its core objective is to recover a computable design state from engineering drawings, carried out collaboratively by the drawing parser and the network generator. 

Drawing parser. The drawing parser is responsible for extracting geometric ele-ments, spatial positions, inlets/outlets, cavity regions, connection relationships, and candidate components from CAD drawings, engineering annotations, and visual cues. Its inputs are raw CAD files (DWG/DXF format), engineering annotation layers, and optional scanned images; its output is structured JSON containing geometric prim-itives, hierarchy information, annotation text, spatial coordinates, and preliminary candidate regions for inlets/outlets/cavities. For CAD primitives with clear rules, the system preferentially uses deterministic parsing tools to read line segments, contours, holes, cavities, hierarchies, and annotation information. For objects with ambiguous semantics, visual language models are used for auxiliary recognition, such as flow boundaries, cavity divisions, local sealing structures, and component categories. The parser also outputs a source confidence score for each recognized object, providing reliability judgment for downstream agents. The introduction of a visual language model enables the system to handle non-standard annotations, handwritten comments, and ambiguous boundaries. Fur-thermore, to provide the precise geometric and physical information required by 19 the subsequent Action agent, a CAD secondary development command line is also provided as a tool for direct drawing query. 

Network generator. The network generator constructs a unified graph-structure representation based on parsing results. Its inputs are structured JSON from the drawing parser, user-supplied design constraints, and similar-case topology references from SAGE; its output is an attributed design graph containing node sets (inlets, outlets, cavities, connection points, intermediate computation nodes), edge sets (pipes, holes, seals, labyrinths, and other flow branches), and attached geometric parameters, physical parameters, source confidence scores, and engineering constraint attributes on nodes and edges. It also outputs solver input drafts and reusable design artifacts. The network generator transforms geometric and semantic information from pars-ing results into an intermediate state directly usable by solvers and optimization algorithms. Nodes and edges carry multi-dimensional attributes simultaneously, mak-ing design intent explicit and computable from its implicit expression in drawings. The generator supports incremental graph construction: when the drawing parser supple-ments new recognition results, the network generator can perform local updates on the existing graph structure rather than rebuilding the complete graph object. We define this intermediate representation as an attributed design graph. Com-pared with directly having a large model generate complete solver inputs, the graph representation offers better interpretability, inspectability, and iterability. Sub-agents do not carry complete design objects in the dialogue context; instead, they read local structured state files and append fields, correct local relationships, or call back-end composition tools as needed. This reduces context-length pressure and mitigates inconsistency problems caused by rewriting large objects. The output of Route A is not an ordinary text description but a continuously updatable structured design state, containing geometric and topological information, object sources, recognition confidence scores, parameter gaps, and computability judg-ments. The subsequent execution path performs solving and optimization directly on this structured state without reinterpreting the original drawing. Therefore, Route A assumes the representational modeling function of the design object in the entire framework: it makes implicit engineering information in drawings explicit, structured, and transformed into a graph state consumable by computation modules. 

4.1.3 Action agent 

Route B is the execution path in our framework. Its objective is to complete phys-ical solving, candidate screening, and optimization iteration on the graph structure generated by Route A, carried out collaboratively by the network optimizer and the network solver. They form a generat, solve, feedback, regenerate, optimization loop, tightly coupling design-space exploration with physical verification. 

Network optimizer. The network optimizer is the candidate structure gener-ation and screening sub-agent, whose core algorithm is MGN. It is responsible for generating diverse candidate topologies in the design space and quickly eliminating infeasible schemes through constraint screening. Its inputs are the graph structure generated by Route A, boundary conditions, initial parameters, design objectives, e.g., pressure-drop limits, flow-distribution requirements, and manufacturing constraints 20 e.g., minimum hole diameter, connectivity requirements. Its outputs are a filtered col-lection of candidate graph structures, each accompanied by constraint satisfaction rate, topological feature vector, and expected performance metrics, together with invalid schemes filtered by MILP and their violated constraint types for feedback correction. Inspired by simulation-aware evolutionary strategies, MGN replaces blind random mutations with a mathematically grounded, three-phase collaborative optimization process: Global Linear Approximation, MILP-Guided Local Optimization, and Pareto-Driven Evolution. 

Phase 1: Global Linear Approximation (Perception). Directly optimizing the black-box physical objectives over the entire domain is computationally pro-hibitive. Therefore, we partition the global design space into multiple small local sub-regions. Within each tightly defined sub-region, we assume the objective functions and physical responses vary linearly. We perform Cartesian sampling across these sub-regions to construct a local numerical derivative for each parameter. By evaluating these sample points, we obtain the first-order partial derivatives, enabling a first-order linear expansion around the local center xk:

f (x) ≈ f (xk) + ∇f (xk)⊤(x − xk) = f (xk) + 

> N

X

> i=1

∂f ∂x i xk

(xi − xk,i )where x represents the continuous design variables, and ∇f (xk) is the local gradient estimated via the Cartesian samples. By applying this linear approximation to all the divided sub-regions, we can process the optimization objective into an input acceptable to subsequent MILP, and because the partial derivatives of the optimization objective with respect to each parameter are calculated based on a large number of sampling points, our calculations are reliable, and subsequent optimizations make full use of this gradient information. 

Phase 2: MILP-Guided Local Optimization (Action). Leveraging the linear expressions derived in Phase 1, we formulate a MILP problem for each sub-region. This module rapidly screens and optimizes the candidates by simultaneously tuning continuous parameters x and discrete topological indicators z (where zj ∈ { 0, 1}

denotes the existence or connectivity of a specific structural edge/node). The MILP formulation effectively eliminates physically infeasible structures, e.g., those violating connectivity, boundary conditions, or manufacturing constraints by embedding them as linear constraints: min  

> x,z

∇f (xk)⊤x + c⊤z

subject to Ax + Bz ≤ b, z ∈ { 0, 1}M

where A and B are constraint matrices defining the physical and topological bound-aries, and b represents the constraint limits. Solving this MILP yields the optimal deterministic sample point ( x∗, z∗) for each local interval, ensuring that computational resources are not wasted on invalid topologies. 

Phase 3: Pareto-Driven Evolution (Integration). Instead of relying on standard random initialization or naive genetic operators, the high-quality, mathe-matically verified optima generated from the MILP module are injected as the elite 21 initial population into the NSGA-II evolution module. NSGA-II then performs non-dominated sorting and crowding distance calculations to search for the global Pareto front. This step systematically balances conflicting multi-objective metrics—such as minimizing pressure drop, maximizing flow uniformity, and reducing structural com-plexity—ultimately achieving significantly faster convergence and higher solution quality than traditional random crossover and mutation strategies. MILP screening intervenes at the generation stage, eliminating invalid candidates before solving and significantly improving computational efficiency. The coupling of NSGA-II with graph structures enables optimization directly in the topological space rather than searching in a fixed parameter space, thereby supporting variable-topology design. Furthermore, constraint-violation information from the network optimizer can flow back directly to Route A, triggering the network generator to repair the graph structure and forming a cross-path feedback loop. Relevant case settings are provided in Appendix B.1. 

Network solver. The network solver functions as the physical computation sub-agent, responsible for performing numerical computations on each candidate graph structure to obtain verifiable physical responses. The primary innovation of this sub-agent lies in its native coupling with Z-GPSolver, which operates as a closed-loop learned solver assistant. In contrast to traditional approaches that necessitate man-ual preprocessing, the proposed framework directly compiles the candidate graph structures, alongside their associated geometric and physical parameters as well as boundary conditions, into standardized numerical inputs. As illustrated in Fig. 6, Z-GPSolver is a general graph-based framework for non-linear physical-system solvers. At the k-th nonlinear iteration, given the current state [pk, T k]⊤ (where pk and Tk denote the coupled physical states, such as pressure and temperature) and the boundary conditions, the underlying physics-based solver eval-uates the nonlinear residual rk and, when required, the local linearization information such as the Jacobian matrix Jk. The correction step is then written in the generic symmetric positive definite (SPD) form 

Ak∆pk = bk,

where Ak and bk may be constructed directly from the physical model or obtained by augmenting a physics-based system with learned graph-structured corrections. In a common normal-equation setting, one may use 

Ak = J⊤ 

> k

Jk, bk = J⊤ 

> k

(−rk),

although Z-GPSolver is not restricted to this specific instantiation. These primary variables are further utilized to construct the supervised targets shown in Fig. 6a, including the raw correction ∆ praw  

> k

, the relaxation-scaled correction αk∆praw  

> k

, and the final targeted response ∆ pfinal  

> k

.The graph neural network encodes node, edge, and global features and performs multi-layer message passing over the system topology. The hidden representation of 22 Fig. 6 The overall framework of Z-GPSolver. (a) Data preparation within the physical-numerical solver. The original physics-based solver computes the residual rk and Jacobian Jk from current states and boundary conditions to generate supervised targets. (b) Learned graph matrix builder. Graph neural networks with L-hop topological message passing aggregate node, edge, and global features to predict diagonal strengths and pairwise coupling weights. (c) Linear solve and Newton update. These predictions construct a SPD matrix for a preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) solver to compute the pressure correction ∆ˆ pk . A physics-informed loss function guides the subsequent Newton update and convergence check, driving the feedback loop. 

node i at layer l + 1 is updated as 

h(l+1)  

> i

= Update 

h(l) 

> i

, X 

> j∈N (i)

m(l)

> i←j

 ,

where m(l) 

> i←j

denotes the message passed from neighboring node j, and N (i) denotes the local topological neighborhood of node i. Based on the resulting embeddings, the 23 network predicts the quantities needed to construct a structure-aware SPD surrogate. Specifically, it outputs the positive diagonal strengths di and the pairwise coupling weights ωij to assemble the learned SPD matrix Aθk, whose elements are explicitly defined as: 

Aθii = di + X 

> j∈N (i)

ωij , Aθij = −ωij .

The resulting learned SPD system is then solved by PCG to obtain the model-assisted correction ∆ˆ pk, which is used in a relaxed Newton-type update 

pk+1 = pk + αk∆ˆ pk.

Rather than serving as an unconstrained black-box predictor, the learning module is trained together with physics-consistency objectives by minimizing the residual-based loss function: 

Lres = ∥Jk∆ˆ pk + rk∥22.

This constraint explicitly enforces the physics-informed condition ∥Jk∆ˆ pk + rk∥22 ≈ 0within the feedback loop, ensuring that the predicted correction remains consistent with the original nonlinear governing equations. After each update, the solver per-forms the standard convergence check and either accepts the new state or proceeds to the next nonlinear iteration. In this way, Z-GPSolver functions as a structure-aware acceleration module for repeated linear correction solves, reducing computational cost while preserving the overall physics-based solution process and maintaining high solu-tion fidelity. Relevant case settings and validation details are provided in Appendix B.2 and C. 

4.1.4 Evaluation and reflection mechanism 

The evaluation process is embedded in the reflection iteration of Route B rather than modeled as an independent agent chain. After each solving completion, the execution agent compares and reflects on current candidates by combining topological connec-tivity, physical responses, constraint satisfaction rates, objective function values, and historical optimization records. If a scheme satisfies design objectives, Pareto-front designs, topology assets, and structured reports are output. If there is excessive leak-age, abnormal pressure drop, convergence failure, or topological constraint conflicts, the problem is written back to the structured state stream, triggering the next round of parameter adjustment, edge generation, topological repair, or candidate screen-ing. When solver feedback reveals graph-structure deficiencies or insufficient boundary conditions, the main agent can redirect the task back to Route A for representation completion. Reflection is therefore not a one-off judgment at the end of the process, but a feedback control mechanism that runs through the entire optimization process. 

4.1.5 Structured state stream 

Route A and Route B are connected through the Structured State Stream, whose solver-ready JSON-like graph representation is shown in Appendix A.4. This state stream preserves not only the graph structure itself but also boundary conditions, 24 parameter sources, tool invocation results, solver results, optimization history, and reflection records. Through this state stream, agents do not need to repeatedly copy complete design objects in natural-language context but perform incremental read– write on existing structured states. This reduces information-loss risks from long contexts and ensures that every design modification and computation result has a clear source. 

4.1.6 SAGE knowledge engine 

SAGE provides the memory and knowledge layer of the system. Its construction, including the ontology-guided organization of documents, solver code and case graphs, is described in Section 4.2; here we focus on its role within the agent architecture. SAGE stores reference models, historical cases, code references and task summaries, and makes this engineering knowledge retrievable by the agents during both design routes. In Route A, it supports drawing comprehension and parameter completion: when the parser encounters semantically ambiguous regions, agents can retrieve recog-nition records from similar historical drawings to help determine cavity boundaries and component categories. In Route B, it supports solver repair and optimization strategy selection: when the network solver fails to converge, agents can retrieve suc-cessful cases with similar topologies to obtain evidence for parameter adjustment and boundary-condition configuration. SAGE does not replace the computational role of the sub-agents or the solver; instead, it provides external evidence and traceable engineering experience for local agent decisions. 

4.1.7 Agent Harness runtime support 

The Agent Harness serves as the runtime support layer, maintaining task states, mes-sage passing, tool permissions, artifact versions, and execution logs between the main agent and sub-agents. The main agent uses the Harness to determine whether the cur-rent task is in the representation or execution stage and delegates specific operations to corresponding sub-agents. When sub-agents execute tasks, they do not maintain isolated contexts individually but read and write around the shared Structured State Stream. The Harness also provides lifecycle management for sub-agents, including launch, monitoring, termination, and fault recovery, ensuring that an anomaly in a single agent does not compromise overall system stability. This design helps avoid state-drift problems common in multi-agent coordination and ensures that every design modification, tool invocation, and solver result can be traced. 

# 4.2 Ontology-driven multimodal RAG 

We developed SAGE as an ontology-driven retrieval-augmented generation system for organizing engineering knowledge and supporting agent-facing reasoning. As illus-trated in Fig. 7, SAGE supports both human users and autonomous engineering agents by converting heterogeneous engineering resources into semantically aligned, queryable graph structures. SAGE integrates several types of engineering knowledge, including text documents, PDF manuals, figures or image-derived content, structured case files and solver source 25 Fig. 7 SAGE architecture for ontology-driven engineering retrieval and reasoning. SAGE organizes engineering knowledge into a unified multimodal knowledge graph. The ontology graph defines domain concepts, variables, constraints and relation schemas, and serves as the semantic layer that binds the other graphs. The code graph exposes solver implementations, formulas, parameters and dependencies; the document graph stores evidence extracted from technical materials; and the case graph records empirical designs, parameter settings and outcomes. During ingestion, entities from documents, code and cases are linked to ontology concepts to create shared semantic anchors across heterogeneous sources. At query time, candidate entities are parsed from the user or agent request, retrieved across graphs and expanded into an ontology-constrained subgraph. The resulting evidence is assembled through subgraph paths and synthesized into either human-readable explanations or structured agent context for solver inspection, case-based completion, failure repair and evidence-grounded decision support. 

code. These sources are organized as four connected views within a unified multi-modal knowledge graph. Within this unified graph, the ontology graph defines domain concepts, aliases, variables, constraints and relation schemas. The document graph stores entities and evidence extracted from technical documents. The code graph rep-resents the white-box structure of the solver, including implementations, formulas, parameters and program dependencies. The case graph stores historical or generated design cases, including topology, objectives, parameter settings and convergence meta-data. Together, these graph views provide complementary representations of the same engineering problem. 26 4.2.1 Ontology-guided graph binding 

The core mechanism of SAGE is ontology-guided graph binding, which aligns entities from documents, code and cases through shared ontology concepts. During ingestion, documents, cases and code repositories are parsed into chunks, entities, relations and metadata. Extracted terms, code symbols, parameter names and case attributes are matched against ontology concepts and aliases. The resulting ontology bindings pro-vide shared semantic anchors across otherwise heterogeneous sources. For example, a physical quantity may be linked simultaneously to its textual explanation in docu-ments, its implementation variable or formula path in solver code, and its observed behavior in historical cases. This binding allows SAGE to retrieve and compose evidence at the concept level, rather than relying only on surface string matching. SAGE stores these representations in a layered backend. A primary PostgreSQL store records documents, entities, relations, ontology definitions and bindings. Qdrant stores dense vector embeddings for semantic retrieval. Neo4j stores typed graph nodes and edges for graph traversal and subgraph construction. Redis is used for caching repeated query results. Embedding, reranking and entity extraction are accessed through a model gateway. This separation makes the retrieval pipeline auditable and robust: each channel can be inspected independently, and keyword or graph retrieval remains available when vector indexing or generation services are unavailable. 

4.2.2 Query processing and subgraph construction 

At query time, SAGE first identifies candidate entities, ontology labels and domain constraints from the user or agent query, thereby converting a natural-language request into graph seeds. These entities serve as seeds for multi-channel retrieval over the pri-mary store, vector index, ontology bindings, graph store, code tools and case memory. Retrieved candidates are merged, deduplicated and reranked. SAGE then expands from the seed concepts over the pre-constructed knowledge graph, following entity and relation types allowed by the ontology schema, to extract a query-specific subgraph. The resulting subgraph is not the full knowledge graph, but a compact ontology-constrained view that connects the document evidence, code mechanisms and case precedents most relevant to the current question. This organization exposes the solver as a searchable, localizable and traceable white-box knowledge structure, rather than leaving it as a black-box executable. SAGE records not only conceptual descriptions from documents, but also their cor-responding variables, functions, formula paths and historical execution outcomes in the solver. Subsequent reasoning can therefore proceed along structured concept– implementation–outcome paths while preserving a direct link between semantic claims and their executable or empirical support. 

4.2.3 Response modes 

SAGE exposes two response modes. For human users, it returns concise natural-language answers with high-level evidence. For engineering agents, it returns struc-tured context including matched ontology concepts, code anchors, formula paths, parameter recommendations, graph paths, case matches and knowledge gaps. This 27 distinction reflects the different use of evidence: users typically need decision-oriented explanations, whereas agents require machine-readable intermediate state for planning, tool invocation and failure recovery. Overall, SAGE implements an ontology-driven engineering RAG method in which the ontology graph provides unified symbolic semantics, while the document, code and case graphs contribute technical evidence, white-box solver structure and historical action traces. Through this alignment, SAGE moves RAG beyond retrieving relevant text snippets toward organizing actionable engineering knowledge, allowing agents to locate supporting evidence, inspect solver mechanisms and plan subsequent operations within an interpretable and traceable structure. 

# CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Bingteng Sun: Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing-original draft. Hao Yin: Data curation, Software, Writing - review & editing. Yiling Chen: 

Data curation, Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Renjie Xiao: Conceptual-ization, Supervision, Writing-review & editing. Lei Xie: Data curation, Writing -review & editing. Shanyou Wang: Writing - review & editing. Ruonan Wang: 

Writing - review & editing. Shubao Chen: Writing - review & editing. Qingzong Xu: Writing - review & editing. Lin Lu: Writing - review & editing. Qiang Du: Data curation, Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Junqiang Zhu: Conceptualization, Supervision, W Writing-review & editing. 

# Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

# Data availability 

Data will be made available on request. 

# Acknowledgements 

The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of Excellence Research Group Program (ERGP, the former Basic Science Center Program) (Grant No.52488101) and the project supported by Young Scientists Fund (A Class, Grant No. 52525603), and the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. ZR2024JQ011). 

# References 

[1] Culubret, S., Rubio, M.A., Sanchez, D.G., Urquia, A.: Performance uniformity analysis in polymer electrolyte fuel cell using long-term dynamic simulation. Applied Energy 365 , 123234 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2024. 123234 28 [2] Roknujjaman, M., Rahman, M.M., Rahman, M.M., Hasan, M.M., Baki, A.B.M., Zhao, M.: Pulsatile flow dynamics in biomedical engineering: A comprehensive review of methods and applications. Physics of Fluids 38 (3) (2026) https://doi. org/10.1063/5.0318753 [3] Duronio, F., De Vita, A., Allocca, L., Montanaro, A., Ranieri, S., Villante, C.: Cfd numerical reconstruction of the flash boiling gasoline spray morphology 1

(2020) https://doi.org/10.4271/2020-24-0010 [4] Rubio, N.L., Darve, E.F., Marsden, A.L.: Data-driven bifurcation handling in physics-based reduced-order vascular hemodynamic models. Computer Meth-ods and Programs in Biomedicine 276 , 109230 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cmpb.2025.109230 [5] Pinardi, A., Mushtaq, N., Gaetani, P.: Development of a reduced order model for turbine blade cooling design. International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power 10 (4), 37 (2025) https://doi.org/10.3390/ijtpp10040037 [6] Wang, C., Zhou, D., Xiao, W., Shui, C., Ma, T., Chen, P., Hao, J., Yan, J.: Research on the dynamic characteristics of natural gas pipeline network with hydrogen injection considering line-pack influence. International Jour-nal of Hydrogen Energy 48 (65), 25469–25486 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ijhydene.2023.03.298 [7] Yan, J., Chen, Z., Huang, J., Zhou, W.: A non-iterative calculation method for zero-dimensional nozzle model of gas turbine engine. Aerospace (2026) [8] Zou, W., Song, Z., Wang, B., Wen, M., Zheng, X.: An efficient multi-fidelity simulation approach for performance prediction of adaptive cycle engines. Journal of the Global Power and Propulsion Society 8, 310–322 (2024) https://doi.org/ 10.33737/jgpps/191167 [9] Wu, J., Lind, M.: Combining empirical knowledge and first principles qualitative and quantitative models in engineering design. Technical University of Denmark (DTU) Publications (2027) [10] Liu, H., Shoemaker, C.A., Jiang, Y., Fu, G., Zhang, C.: Preconditioning water distribution network optimization with head loss–based design method. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 146 (12) (2020) https://doi.org/ 10.1061/(asce)wr.1943-5452.0001299 [11] Sangroula, U., Han, K.-H., Koo, K.-M., Gnawali, K., Yum, K.-T.: Optimization of water distribution networks using genetic algorithm based sop–wdn program. Water 14 (6), 851 (2022) https://doi.org/10.3390/w14060851 [12] Gupta, I., Gupta, A., Khanna, P.: Genetic algorithm for optimization of water distribution systems. Environmental Modelling & Software 14 (5), 437–446 (1999) 29 https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-8152(98)00089-9 [13] Liang, M., Xu, M., Wang, S.: A novel multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for transit network design and frequency-setting problem considering passen-gers’ choice behaviors under station congestion. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 197 , 103238 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2025.103238 [14] Mikaberidze, G., Mikaberidze, B., Taylor, D.: GradNet: A Gradient-Based Frame-work for Optimal Network Science. arXiv (2026). https://doi.org/10.48550/ ARXIV.2603.09197 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.09197 [15] Cembrano, G., Brdy´ s, M., Quevedo, J., Coulbeck, B., Orr, C.H.: Optimization of a multi-reservoir water network using a conjugate gradient technique. A case study, pp. 987–999. Springer, ??? (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/bfb0042283 . 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0042283 

[16] Antaki, G.A.: Piping and Pipeline Engineering: Design, Construction, Mainte-nance, Integrity, and Repair, 1st edn., p. 564. CRC Press, ??? (2003) [17] Clay, J., Sha, Z.: Paradigmatic design thinking: how generative ai changes the role of human designers. Proceedings of the Design Society 5, 2571–2579 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1017/pds.2025.10271 [18] Chiarello, F., Barandoni, S., Majda ˇSkec, M., Fantoni, G.: Generative large lan-guage models in engineering design: opportunities and challenges. Proceedings of the Design Society 4, 1959–1968 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1017/pds.2024.198 [19] Daareyni, A., Martikkala, A., Mokhtarian, H., Ituarte, I.F.: Generative ai meets cad: enhancing engineering design to manufacturing processes with large language models. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology (2025) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-025-15830-2 [20] Zhao, W.X., Zhou, K., Li, J., Tang, T., Wang, X., Hou, Y., Min, Y., Zhang, B., Zhang, J., Dong, Z., et al.: A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 (2023) [21] Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter, B., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q., Zhou, D.: Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. arXiv (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2201.11903 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903 [22] Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., Cao, Y.: React: Syn-ergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In: The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (2023) [23] Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dess` ı, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli, M., Zettlemoyer, L., Cancedda, N., Scialom, T.: Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves 30 to use tools. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2023) [24] Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., Yao, S.: Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2023) [25] Wu, Y., Min, S.Y., Bisk, Y., Salakhutdinov, R., Azaria, A., Li, Y., Mitchell, T., Prabhumoye, S.: Plan, Eliminate, and Track – Language Models are Good Teachers for Embodied Agents. arXiv (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV. 2305.02412 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02412 [26] Li, G., Hammoud, H.A.A.A., Itani, H., Khizbullin, D., Ghanem, B.: Camel: Com-municative agents for” mind” exploration of large language model society. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2023) [27] Qian, C., Liu, W., Liu, H., Chen, N., Dang, Y., Li, J., Yang, C., Chen, W., Su, Y., Cong, X., Xu, J., Li, D., Liu, Z., Sun, M.: Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development, 15174–15186 (2024) https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024. acl-long.810 [28] Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Li, B., Zhu, E., Jiang, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Liu, J., et al.: Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 (2023) [29] Hong, S., Zhuge, M., Chen, J., Zheng, X., Cheng, Y., Zhang, C., Wang, J., Wang, Z., Yau, S.S., Lin, Z., et al. : Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In: The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024) [30] Shao, E., Wang, Y., Qian, Y., Pan, Z., Liu, H., Wang, D.: Sciscigpt: advancing human–ai collaboration in the science of science. Nature Computational Science 

6(3), 301–315 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-025-00906-6 [31] Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., K¨ uttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t., Rockt¨ aschel, T., et al. : Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474 (2020) [32] Asai, A., Wu, Z., Wang, Y., Sil, A., Hajishirzi, H.: Self-rag: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In: The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024) [33] Edge, D., Trinh, H., Cheng, N., Bradley, J., Chao, A., Mody, A., Truitt, S., Larson, J.: From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130 (2024) [34] Ma, Y.J., Liang, W., Wang, G., Huang, D.-A., Bastani, O., Jayaraman, D., Zhu, 31 Y., Lin, L., Anandkumar, A.: Eureka: Human-level reward design via coding large language models. In: The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (2024) [35] Xu, H., Wu, D., Chinazzi, M., Niu, R., Yu, R., Ma, Y.-A.: SimulRAG: Simulator-based RAG for Grounding LLMs in Long-form Scientific QA. arXiv (2025). https: //doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2509.25459 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25459 [36] Venkatesh, P.R., P, R.K.: Ontollm: Enhancing llm grounding and digression pre-vention with ontologies and knowledge graphs. Expert Systems with Applications 

314 , 131505 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2026.131505 [37] Kommineni, V.K., K¨ onig-Ries, B., Samuel, S.: From human experts to machines: An LLM supported approach to ontology and knowledge graph construction. arXiv (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2403.08345 . https://arxiv.org/ abs/2403.08345 [38] Liu, R., Luobei, L., Li, J., Wang, B., Liu, M., Wu, D., Wang, S., Qin, B.: Ontology-guided reverse thinking makes large language models stronger on knowl-edge graph question answering, 15269–15284 (2025) https://doi.org/10.18653/ v1/2025.acl-long.741 [39] Feng, Y., Hu, H., Ying, S., Hou, X., Liu, S., Yang, M., Li, J., Du, S., Zheng, N., Hu, H., Gao, Y.: Hyper-rag: combating llm hallucinations using hypergraph-driven retrieval-augmented generation. Nature Communications (2026) https:// doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-71411-1 [40] Baran, M.E., Wu, F.F.: Network reconfiguration in distribution systems for loss reduction and load balancing. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 4(2), 1401– 1407 (1989) https://doi.org/10.1109/61.25627 [41] Alperovits, E., Shamir, U.: Design of optimal water distribution systems. Water Resources Research 13 (6), 885–900 (1977) https://doi.org/10.1029/ wr013i006p00885 [42] Savic, D.A., Walters, G.A.: Genetic algorithms for least-cost design of water distri-bution networks. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 123 (2), 67–77 (1997) https://doi.org/10.1061/(asce)0733-9496(1997)123:2(67) 32 A Agent Prompts & Workflows 

# A.1 Z-COPA Agent Prompts 

This appendix presents compact prompt cards for the Z-COPA multi-agent work-flow. The cards are written for paper presentation: they summarize role boundaries, workflow responsibilities, and output contracts in a concise manuscript-facing form. 

A.1.1 Runtime Manager and Functional Agents 

Z-COPA uses an AutoGen SelectorGroupChat-style runtime to coordinate agent turns. The Manager prompt belongs to this runtime layer. It is not a domain-reasoning agent and is not counted as a design specialist. Its role is to select the next speaker and pass a short routing instruction according to the conversation state. Therefore, the Manager is reported separately from the functional agents below; it answers only 

who acts next , whereas the Planner answers what workflow evidence is missing and what the next specialist should do .The scientific workflow agents are organized into three functional groups: 

• Supervisor Agent: includes the Planner , which interprets the task at the process level and maintains the auditable workflow state. 

• Representation Agent: includes the Parser , which converts heteroge-neous engineering inputs into a structured engineering representation, and the Generator , which assembles this representation into a solver-ready zero-dimensional model request. Here, Generator means model-request generation, not optimizer candidate generation. 

• Design Agent: includes TopologyEngineer , Evaluator , and Solver . These agents expose legal design actions, generate and evaluate candidates, select a solver-backed design, and validate it with the downstream solver. 

A.1.2 System Prompt: Manager 

Role: You are the AutoGen SelectorGroupChat conversation manager for the Z-COPA co-planning workflow. Focus on selecting the next speaker and providing a short routing instruction; domain reasoning is handled by the functional agents. 

Decision rules: 

1. Start: If a new user task arrives, select Planner .2. After planning: If the planner records the workflow state, select the role named in next role .3. After representation construction: If a structured engineering representa-tion is produced but no solver-ready model request exists, select Generator .4. After model-request generation: If a model-ready request exists but legal design actions or objective context are missing, select TopologyEngineer .5. After candidate generation: If candidates exist but candidate evaluation or selection evidence is missing, select Evaluator .6. Before validation: If a selected candidate exists but solver validation is missing, select Solver .33 7. Termination: After final evaluation confirms sufficient evidence, output 

TERMINATE .

Output format: 

{

"next speaker": "AgentName", "instruction": "Task description..." 

}

A.1.3 System Prompt: Supervisor Agent / Planner 

Role: You are the Planner in the Supervisor Agent. You interpret the user task at the workflow level, maintain the structured process state, and assign specialist agents. Focus on process-level interpretation, evidence tracking, and routing; specialist agents handle parsing, solver-request generation, design evaluation, selection, and validation. 

Core workflow: 

1. Parse task intent: Identify the domain, input type, design mode, required evidence, and whether the task requires model representation, design action, solver validation, or final evaluation. 2. Track evidence: Record which artifacts are present or missing. 3. Route model representation: Send heterogeneous engineering inputs to 

Parser when a structured model representation is missing. 4. Route model generation: Send the structured representation to Generator 

when a solver-ready zero-dimensional model request is missing. 5. Route design: Send legal action exposure, candidate generation, evaluation, and selection to the Design Agent. 6. Route validation: Send the selected candidate to Solver .

Output format: 

workflow state: current phase: 

<representation | solver ready | design | evaluation | complete >

completed evidence: [ <items >]missing evidence: [ <items >]next role: <AgentName >

next instruction: <instruction >

stop ready: <true|false >

A.1.4 System Prompt: Representation Agent / Parser 

Role: You are the Parser in the Representation Agent. You construct a structured engineering representation from heterogeneous inputs. Depending on the task, inputs may include drawings, diagrams, tabular specifications, existing network descriptions, historical design records, or configured solver contexts. 

Core workflow: 

34 1. Perceive engineering inputs: Identify available engineering evidence and call the appropriate inspection or perception tool when the representation is incomplete. 2. Construct representation: Organize components, geometry, attributes, spa-tial or connectivity relations, boundary conditions, and task requirements into a structured model-facing form. 3. Check representational consistency: Verify that the structured represen-tation is compatible with the downstream zero-dimensional model contract. 4. Use retrieval only when needed: Call SAGE or ontology retrieval only for terminology, component semantics, or constraint interpretation uncertainty. 5. Handoff: Return the structured representation to Generator .

Scope: Focus on constructing the structured model representation and hand off the resulting evidence to Generator .

Output format: 

representation evidence: [ <artifacts >]component status: <ready|missing >

geometry status: <ready|missing|not applicable >

boundary status: <ready|missing >

connectivity status: <ready|missing >

knowledge status: <used|skipped|failed >

recommended next role: Generator 

A.1.5 System Prompt: Representation Agent / Generator 

Role: You are the Generator in the Representation Agent. You assemble the struc-tured engineering representation into a solver-ready zero-dimensional model request. In this prompt, Generator means model-request generation from the structured representation; it does not mean optimizer candidate generation. 

Core workflow: 

1. Read structured representation: Consume the component, geometry, attribute, boundary, and connectivity representation produced by Parser .2. Assemble model request: Build or export the structured zero-dimensional solver request required by the downstream Design Agent. 3. Expose model contract: Report nodes, edges/links, components, param-eters, boundary conditions, constraints, and available action schemas when present. 4. Check readiness: Verify that the request can be consumed by design-action and solver tools. 5. Handoff: Send the solver-ready request to TopologyEngineer .

Scope: Focus on producing the solver-ready request consumed by the downstream Design Agent. 

Output format: 

35 solver request status: <ready|missing|incomplete >

model summary: <nodes/components/links/parameters >

boundary conditions: <summary >

legal action schema: <available|missing >

known gaps: [ <items >]recommended next role: TopologyEngineer 

A.1.6 System Prompt: Design Agent / Topology Engineer 

Role: You are TopologyEngineer in the Design Agent. You expose legal topology and parameter actions, define the agent-selected search space, and generate design candidates from the solver-ready model contract. 

Core workflow: 

1. Prepare objectives: Read the task objectives, constraints, and solver con-tract. 2. Read legal actions: Inspect visible parameters, topology or structural action schemas, and domain constraints. 3. Submit search space: Provide an explicit search-space intent using only legal variables, legal actions, and visible identifiers. 4. Generate candidates: Call the candidate-generation tool only after the search-space intent is validated. 5. Handoff: Send the generated candidate batch to Evaluator .

Decision rules: 

• Use only variables, identifiers, and actions visible in the current task contract. 

• Use topology or structural actions only when exposed by the visible action schema. 

• Treat SAGE as guidance for terminology, semantics, safe ranges, constraints, and repair guidance while keeping actions aligned with the current model contract and solver-validation evidence. 

Output format: 

agent search space json: <validated intent >

candidate policy: <policy >

candidate batch artifact: <path >

knowledge used: <true|false >

recommended next role: Evaluator 

A.1.7 System Prompt: Design Agent / Evaluator 

Role: You are the Evaluator in the Design Agent. You evaluate generated candidates, reflect on trade-offs and constraint status, request refinement when justified, and select the candidate that should be sent to solver validation. 

Core workflow: 

36 1. Evaluate batch: Inspect candidate feasibility, objective values, constraint status, and diversity. 2. Reflect before selection: Compare trade-offs before choosing any candidate. 3. Request refinement if needed: Ask TopologyEngineer for refinement only when the evaluation evidence justifies it and budget remains. 4. Select candidate: Choose one candidate with explicit rationale and criteria. 5. Handoff: Send the selected artifact to Solver .

Decision rules: 

• Prefer feasibility-first selection before reporting score, improvement, or struc-tural preference. 

• Base selection on explicit candidate evidence, including feasibility, objective values, constraint status, and diversity. 

• Use solver validation as the source of final performance evidence. 

Output format: 

evaluation status: <done|needs refinement|blocked >

selection rationale: <evidence >

selection criteria: <criteria >

selected candidate id: <id >

selected candidate artifact: <path >

recommended next role: Solver 

A.1.8 System Prompt: Design Agent / Solver 

Role: You are the Solver in the Design Agent. You run solver validation only on selected candidate or solver-request artifacts. 

Core workflow: 

1. Check handoff: Confirm that a selected candidate or solver request is available. 2. Run solver: Execute the solver validation tool on the selected artifact. 3. Report evidence: Return solver status, residual, iterations, feasibility, objec-tive values, and artifact paths. 4. Return for evaluation: Send solver-backed evidence to Evaluator for final reporting or rejection. 

Scope: Focus on solver execution and return validation evidence to Evaluator .

Output format: 

solver status: <success|failed >

residual: <value >

iterations: <value >

objective evidence: <metrics >

solver result artifact: <path >

recommended next role: Evaluator 

37 A.2 Agent Workflows 

This appendix provides a condensed interaction trace derived from a trust-gated B5 workflow. The trace below is shortened for paper readability while preserving the actual workflow order and tool-evidence structure. 

A.2.1 Interaction Trace 

The following is a condensed interaction trace for the task: “Given a configured zero-dimensional engineering model and associated design context, perform solver-backed multi-objective co-planning to improve the design while preserving feasibility and boundary constraints.” 

User: Optimize the supplied engineering model under the specified multi-objective design requirements and return a solver-validated candidate. 

Manager: Delegating to Planner .

Planner: Analysis: The task requires a complete perception–action–solver workflow. The first missing evidence is the structured model context and solver-ready request. 

Output: 

• Current phase: perception and context verification. 

• Missing evidence: structured context, solver-request snapshot, objective con-text, candidate batch, reflection record, candidate selection, solver validation, and final audit. 

• Next role: Parser .

• Instruction: extract structured context and export the solver-ready model artifact. 

Manager: Delegating to Parser .

Parser: Action: calling inspect structured context .

Output: 

• Structured context found. 

• Solver-ready request available. 

• Model summary: 10 nodes and 4 links. 

• Status: ready for downstream solver-request export. 

Parser: Action: calling get blueprint vlm blind context .

Output: 

• Drawing/context evidence loaded under blind artifact policy. 

• Ground-truth labels are not exposed to the agent. 

• Context is used only as perception evidence, not as optimization output. 

Manager: Parsed engineering evidence detected. Delegating to Generator .

Generator: Action: calling export solver request snapshot .

Output: 

• Solver-request artifact exported. 

• Model summary: 10 nodes, 4 links, and 9 link elements. 

• Structured solver state is ready for action planning. 38 Manager: New model-ready artifact detected. Delegating to Planner .

Planner: The perception stage is complete. The workflow now requires domain evidence, objective preparation, legal search-space construction, and candidate gener-ation. 

Manager: Delegating to TopologyEngineer .

Topology Engineer: Action: calling retrieve knowledge .

Output: 

• SAGE retrieval completed for the active design context. 

• Retrieved evidence is used as guidance for variable semantics, safe ranges, physical constraints, and repair hints. 

• SAGE is not treated as solver validation or as a hidden candidate source. 

Topology Engineer: Action: calling prepare solver objective context .

Output: 

• Objective context prepared. 

• Agent-proposed search space accepted. 

• Search-space source: agent-visible numeric proposal. 

• Hidden fallback search space: not used. 

Topology Engineer: Action: calling generate solver algorithm candidates with the MGN policy. 

Output: 

• Candidate batch generated. 

• Candidate distribution conditioned by visible solver variables and SAGE guidance. 

• The optimizer uses raw physical objectives; reporting score is not used as the internal objective. 

Manager: Candidate batch detected. Delegating to Evaluator for reflection before selection. 

Evaluator: Action: calling reflect on candidate batch .

Evaluation: 

• Feasibility and constraint status are checked before score comparison. 

• Candidate trade-offs are assessed across leakage, flow consumption, and pressure-balance behavior. 

• Reflection recommends one refinement round because budget remains. 

Manager: Refinement requested by Evaluator . Delegating back to 

TopologyEngineer .

Topology Engineer: Action: calling refine solver algorithm candidates .

Output: 

• Refined candidate batch generated. 

• Refinement remains within the validated search-space contract. 

Manager: Refined candidate batch detected. Delegating to Evaluator .39 Evaluator: Action: calling reflect on candidate batch on the refined batch. 

Evaluation: 

• Feasible candidates are identified in the refined batch. 

• Selection remains feasibility-first. 

• The candidate sage preferred param probe 0.88 is selected for final solver validation based on feasible solver-backed preview evidence and SAGE-aligned variable semantics. 

Evaluator: Action: calling select solver candidate from batch .

Output: 

• Selected candidate: sage preferred param probe 0.88 .

• Selection criteria: feasibility-first gateway score. 

• Selection rationale: candidate is feasible; SAGE-guided parameter semantics support the selected trade-off; no tool-side winner is accepted without agent selection evidence. 

Manager: Selected candidate detected. Triggering solver validation. 

Solver: Action: calling run solver automation .

Evaluation: 

• Solver status: success. 

• Residual norm: 2 .54 × 10 −10 .

• Solver iterations: 15. 

• Termination condition: gtol satisfied. 

Solver output: 

• Seal leakage: 1.8324 kg/s. 

• Total flow: 7.4156 kg/s. 

• Pressure coefficient of variation: 0.3682. 

• Relative improvement over the configured reference: +1.10% leakage improve-ment, +23.92% flow-consumption improvement, and approximately unchanged pressure-balance behavior. 

Manager: Solver-backed candidate detected. Triggering final evaluation. 

Evaluator: Evidence check: candidate generation, candidate reflection, explicit can-didate selection, solver validation, feasibility status, objective metrics, and artifact paths are all present. 

Final Verdict: 

> verdict: PASS TERMINATE

# A.3 Project Structure 

As shown in Fig. 8, the project-structure snapshot provides implementation-level evidence that Z-COPA is built as a modular multi-agent engineering system. Its organization separates prompts, runtime configuration, tool interfaces, solver connec-tors, benchmark utilities and generated outputs, allowing the reasoning layer and the numerical validation layer to be inspected independently. This modularity is important 40 Fig. 8 Project structure of the Z-COPA multi-agent system. The snapshot shows the repos-itory layout of the implemented Z-COPA project, covering agent workflow modules, configuration files, tool interfaces, solver connectors, benchmark modules and result-processing utilities. The sep-arated components reflect the runtime, reasoning, tool-calling, solver-validation and reporting layers of the system. 

41 Fig. 9 Solver-ready JSON structure for zero-dimensional model planning. The snapshot shows the model-facing schema used by Z-COPA, including nodes, links, components, boundary conditions, design objectives, constraints and admissible parameter ranges. Right-side annotations identify the corresponding information types, including geometry information, physical information, position information, graph topology, objectives, constraints and parameter ranges. 

for reproducibility because agent behaviour, tool contracts and solver-backed evidence remain traceable across runs. 42 A.4 JSON Structure 

As shown in Fig. 9, the solver-ready JSON snapshot illustrates the point at which heterogeneous engineering evidence becomes executable design context. Rather than treating drawings, component attributes, connectivity and constraints as separate records, Z-COPA consolidates them into a single model-facing representation that can be inspected by agents, modified through legal actions and validated by solvers. This schema is therefore the interface that links perception, planning and numerical evaluation in the zero-dimensional model planning workflow. 

# A.5 Evaluation Metrics Definition 

Success Rate (SR). SR measures whether the system can complete the full agent– tool workflow and produce a physically valid design. A run is counted as successful if it completes all required workflow stages, returns a solver-backed design, and the design satisfies all hard constraints. For R independent runs, SR is defined as SR = 1

R

> R

X

> r=1

I(r)succ ,

where I(r)succ = 1 if run r is successful and I(r)succ = 0 otherwise. 

Objective Improvement. For each case, let Mc denote the set of reported objec-tives and let Pr,m be the value of objective m returned by run r. Let P0,m denote the corresponding value of the initial input design. The relative improvement of objective 

m is defined according to its optimization direction: 

Ir,m =



P0,m − Pr,m 

|P0,m | , if objective m is minimized ,Pr,m − P0,m 

|P0,m | , if objective m is maximized ,

|P0,m − Mobj ,m | − | Pr,m − Mobj ,m |

max ( |P0,m − Mobj ,m |, ϵ m) , if objective m targets Mobj ,m .

Here, Mobj ,m is the prescribed target value for objective m, and ϵm is a small scale factor used only to avoid division by zero when the initial design already matches the target. Thus, positive values indicate improvement over the initial design, while negative values indicate degradation. 

Total Score. For each run, the Total Score is computed as a weighted sum of the objective-improvement ratios: TotalScore r = X

> m∈M c

wc,m Ir,m , X

> m∈M c

wc,m = 1 .

Here, wc,m is the reporting weight assigned to objective m in case c. The Total Score is used only for reporting and cross-baseline comparison; it is not used as the internal optimization objective of NSGA-II, MGN, or other domain-specific optimizers. 43 In the SAS benchmark, the three reported physical objectives, which are all to be minimized, are seal leakage kg s , total flow kg s , and pressure cv . The first measures seal leakage mass flow and is reported as the seal-leakage score (SLS). The second measures total bleed/cooling-air consumption and is reported as the total-flow score (TFS). The third measures the pressure coefficient of variation across the selected cavity and boundary nodes, reflecting chamber-pressure nonuniformity, and is reported as the pressure-balance score (PBS). We use the reporting weights 

wSLS = 0 .5, wTFS = 0 .3, wPBS = 0 .2,

so that TotalScore SAS  

> r

= 0 .5Ir, SLS + 0 .3Ir, TFS + 0 .2Ir, PBS .

Unless otherwise stated, all reported values are averaged over the valid runs in each case–baseline group. 

# B Implementation Details 

# B.1 MGN Configuration 

Table 1 : MGN hyperparameters used in Design Agent. 

Module Parameter Value Perception Local Sample Pool ( Npool ) 12 Local Expansion Size ( Nexpand ) 12 Landscape Passes 8Retained Elite Fraction 0.10 

Action Guided Recombination Probability ( pr ) 0.90 Local Perturbation Probability ( pp) 0.20 Comparison Group Size 2Exploration Quota 0.20 

Action Guidance Guidance Trigger Schedule Pass 0; every 2 passes Guided Elite Fraction 0.35 Frozen-variable Ratio 0.80 Local-release Ratio 0.20 

Integration Guided Recombination Quota 0.40 Local Branching Quota 0.40 Exploratory Perturbation Quota 0.20 

Gateway Budget Initial Candidate Budget 20 Reflection Refinement Budget 5Solver-evaluation Cap 15 

Selection Objective Handling Raw Pareto min. Final Selection Rule Constraint-first 

44 Module Parameter Value 

Critical Boundary-flow Floor 0.95 of baseline 

Reproducibility Internal Random Seed 42 Run-level Seed Recorded per run 

# B.2 Z-GPSolver Configuration  

> Fig. 10 Representative air-system benchmark and graph construction for Z-GPSolver.

This appendix considers a complex air-system network as a representative application scenario to validate the applicability of Z-GPSolver to complex network solving tasks. The system is a fixed-topology, parameter-perturbed multi-branch coupled network with multiple inlet, outlet, chamber, and intermediate nodes. The branches are globally coupled through shared nodal pressures, mass-conservation constraints, and local resistance characteristics, thereby exhibiting the typical features of complex topology, multi-branch coupling, and strongly nonlinear pressure balancing. 

Table 2 : The Experiment Settings and Parameters of Z-GPSolver 

Category Setting Value Note Application scenario 

complex aero-engine SAS network 64 nodes, 40 branches, 66 elements 4 inlets, 16 outlets, 44 internal nodes 

Topology fixed-topology, parameter-perturbed multi-branch coupled network strong nonlinear pressure balance 

Dataset accepted samples 7,319 split: 4391 / 1464 / 1464 

Perturbation key physical parameters 10 geometry, seal, swirl, flow coefficients 

Graph input 

node / edge / global features 13 / 9 / 6 graph representation 

45 Category Setting Value Note GNN backbone 

hidden dim / message passes 64 / 3 pressure-correction model 

Correction setup 

relaxation scale α /init scale ratio 0.005 / 1e-4 learned correction strength 

Training setup 

batch size / learning rate 16 / 1.5e-4 weight decay = 1e-4 The overall network structure and its configuration are illustrated in Fig. 10 and Table 2. The figure summarizes the network topology, the physical components, and the corresponding configuration parameters of the air system. During sample construction, the network topology, node types, and branch connectivity are kept unchanged, while a selected set of key physical parameters is perturbed. After uniform screening, 7,319 accepted samples are retained and partitioned into 4,391 training samples, 1,464 validation samples, and 1,464 test samples. Under this application setting, Z-GPSolver adopts a graph-neural-network-based PCG pressure-correction model with a hidden dimension of 64 and three message-passing layers, while the correction scale and initialization ratio are set to 0.005 and 10 −4, respectively. This configuration represents a concrete instantiation of Z-GPSolver in a complex air-system set-ting, with the objective of improving the efficiency and consistency of the pressure-correction stage while preserving the original physics-based solution framework. 

# C Extended Experimental Evaluation and Analysis 

To evaluate Z-GPSolver in this complex air-system setting, we conduct extended experiments from three aspects: end-to-end system efficiency, pressure-correction linear-stage efficiency, and pressure-result consistency. The air system is used here as a representative application of Z-GPSolver, and the key significance of the results is to demonstrate the behavior of the method on problems with complex topology, multi-branch coupling, and strongly nonlinear pressure balancing. As shown in Fig. 11, Z-GPSolver reduces the mean end-to-end solution time from 96.78 s to 72.30 s, saving 24.48 s per case on average. At the linear stage, it reduces the pressure-correction solve time from 90.79 ms to 16.49 ms, confirming that the main advantage of the method lies in accelerating the pressure-correction equation. Meanwhile, the pointwise pres-sure comparison yields a mean relative error of only 0.55428%, indicating that the acceleration is achieved while maintaining high pressure consistency. Taken together, these results show that the primary gain of Z-GPSolver comes from the faster pressure-correction linear solve, while the more moderate system-level improvement reflects the fact that branch-state refresh, residual assembly, Jacobian construction, and tem-perature updates remain in the original physics-based framework. Even so, the reduction in total solve time demonstrates that local linear-stage acceleration can be effectively transferred to the overall complex-network solution process without a substantial loss of accuracy. 

46 Fig. 11 Evaluation of Z-GPSolver on the representative air-system benchmark in terms of solution efficiency and pressure consistency. (a) End-to-end solve time comparison. The Z-GPSolver accelerates the overall computational process, reducing the total solve time from 96.78 s (Newton solver) to 72.30 s. (b) Linear solve time comparison. The proposed method demonstrates significant efficiency gains in the linear solving step, drastically decreasing the required time from 90.79 ms to 16.49 ms. (c) Pressure prediction accuracy across random test samples. The pressure profile generated by the Z-GPSolver closely aligns with the Newton solver , maintaining high physical fidelity with a mean relative error of only 0.55428%. 

47