Title: Automating structural reliability analysis with a multi-agent large language model framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.16580v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 00:20:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
# Automating structural reliability analysis with a multi-agent large language model framework 

Jaehwan Jeon a, Chang Hee Lee b, Taeyong Kim c, ∗

> aDepartment of Civil and Mineral Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
> bDepartment of Civil, Urban and Environmental Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
> cDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Abstract 

Structural reliability analysis supports the design and safety assessment of buildings and civil infrastructure but requires specialized expertise through-out the workflow. This study presents a multi-agent large language model framework that automates component-level reliability analysis from a natural-language problem statement to interpreted estimates of the reliability in-dex and failure probability. Specialized agents handle problem formulation, method planning, code generation, execution, and result interpretation, with human confirmation at key decision points. The Method Planner is fine-tuned using QLoRA for a priori reliability-method category selection. Anal-ysis results are not generated directly by an LLM; instead, validated deter-ministic solvers compute the reliability estimates, improving reproducibility and reducing hallucination risk. The framework uses open-weight models and supports local execution without closed APIs. Results show that it low-ers the expertise barrier to structural reliability assessment while preserving computational trustworthiness. 

Keywords: Structural reliability, Large language model, Multi-agent system, Human-in-the-loop, Domain-specialized fine-tuning   

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email address: tyong.kim@yonsei.ac.kr (Taeyong Kim) arXiv:2607.16580v1 [stat.AP] 18 Jul 2026

1. Introduction 

Buildings and civil infrastructure are designed and operated under un-certainty in loads, material properties, geometry, and modeling parameters. Structural reliability analysis provides a probabilistic framework for repre-senting these uncertainties as random variables and quantifying the likelihood that a structure exceeds a prescribed limit state, commonly expressed as the probability of failure Pf , or the equivalent reliability index β = −Φ−1(Pf )

[1]. This concept is deeply embedded in modern design codes worldwide, including partial safety factor formats and load-and-resistance-factor design, which aim to ensure adequate structural safety under uncertain demand and resistance [2]. In recent decades, climate change, urbanization, aging infras-tructure, and increasing system complexity have further amplified the sources and consequences of uncertainty, making reliability-based assessment increas-ingly important for both new design and existing infrastructure management. However, conducting structural reliability analysis still requires specialized expertise in probability theory, structural mechanics, numerical simulation, and computational methods. This creates a practical barrier for the grow-ing number of engineers and researchers who require reliability estimates but may not have advanced training in reliability theory or probabilistic compu-tation. The present paper addresses this gap by developing an end-to-end automated reliability analysis workflow using large language models (LLMs). The proposed workflow streamlines the computational process while main-taining engineer oversight throughout the analysis. 

1.1. Background 

A main objective of structural reliability analysis is to estimate the prob-ability of failure, Pf , and the corresponding reliability index, β = −Φ−1(Pf ),where Φ−1(·) denotes the inverse cumulative distribution function of the stan-dard normal distribution. In general, Pf is defined as the integral of the joint probability density function fX(x) of the random variables X over the failure domain: 

Pf =

Z

> g(X)≤0

fX(x) dx. (1) where g(X) is the limit-state function, which mathematically defines the boundary between safe and failure states. Failure is assumed to occur when 

g(X) ≤ 0, while g(X) > 0 corresponds to the safe domain. For a two-dimensional random-variable space, the graphical relationship between the 2Failure domain Safe domain Figure 1: Failure domain and the limit-state surface g(X) = 0 .

safe domain, the failure domain, and the limit-state surface g(X) = 0 is illus-trated in Fig. 1. Note that this study focuses on component-level structural reliability analysis, in which failure is defined by a single limit-state func-tion; the extension to system-level reliability involving multiple limit-state functions is deferred to future work, as discussed in Section 4.3. A typical reliability analysis involves four major steps. The first step is problem definition , in which the uncertain physical quantities are identi-fied from the engineering problem and modeled as random variables X with appropriate probability distributions. In this step, the limit-state function 

g(X) should be formulated to represent the failure condition of interest, such as excessive stress, displacement, ductility demand, or loss of load-carrying capacity. The second step is method selection . Because Eq. (1) generally has no closed-form solution, an appropriate reliability method needs to be selected to evaluate or approximate the failure probability. The choice of method de-pends on several factors, including the dimensionality of the random-variable space, the degree of nonlinearity of the limit-state function, the presence of multiple failure regions, the target range of Pf , and the computational cost of each model evaluation. Approximation methods, such as the first-order re-liability method (FORM) and second-order reliability method (SORM), are widely used because they can estimate Pf efficiently by approximating the limit-state surface near the design point [3, 4]. However, their accuracy may deteriorate when the limit-state function is highly nonlinear, when multiple 3design points exist, or when the failure domain has a complex geometry. Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) provides a more general and conceptually straightforward alternative because it estimates Pf directly from random samples. In principle, the MCS estimate converges to the true failure prob-ability as the number of samples approaches infinity. However, standard MCS becomes computationally inefficient for rare-event problems, particu-larly when Pf is small or when each evaluation of g(X) requires an expensive numerical model, such as a finite-element analysis. To improve efficiency in such cases, various variance-reduction and advanced simulation techniques have been developed, including subset simulation (SuS) [5], cross-entropy-based importance sampling [6], sequential importance sampling (SIS) [7], combination line sampling (CLS) [8], and stochastic spectral embedding [9]. However, implementing these methods remains challenging because it often requires algorithm-specific parameter selection, convergence assessment, and problem-dependent tuning; thus, their practical use can be difficult for en-gineers and researchers who lack specialized expertise in reliability analysis. Because each method has distinct advantages, assumptions, and limitations, selecting a suitable method is essential for achieving accurate reliability es-timates with reasonable computational effort. However, the required expert judgment and limited generalizability of fixed selection rules motivate the use of an AI-assisted method-selection strategy in the proposed framework. The third step is implementation . Once a reliability method has been se-lected, it should be implemented consistently with the prescribed random variables, probability distributions, dependence structure, and limit-state function. In practice, this requires either developing a reliable computational implementation or correctly using existing reliability software packages, such as FERUM [10] or ERA [11]. Errors in implementation, such as incorrect distribution parameters, inconsistent transformations of random variables, or improper convergence criteria, can significantly affect the estimated failure probability. The fourth step is result interpretation . The computed failure probabil-ity Pf and reliability index β needs to be evaluated in relation to target reliability levels, design requirements, and engineering consequences. This step is not merely numerical; it requires translating probabilistic results into engineering insight, such as whether a structure satisfies a prescribed safety level, which variables dominate the failure probability, or whether additional design modifications are required. Despite the maturity of structural reliability theory, the complete analy-4sis workflow remains difficult for non-experts because it requires integrated knowledge of probability theory, structural mechanics, numerical methods, and computational implementation. Moreover, upstream errors or inconsis-tencies can propagate through the workflow, thereby compromising the final estimates of Pf and β.

1.2. Related work 1.2.1. Large language models and multi-agent systems for engineering 

Building on the demonstrated capabilities in natural-language under-standing and code generation, LLMs have rapidly been applied to the au-tomation of engineering tasks. In its simplest early form, a single LLM interprets a problem stated in natural language and directly generates and executes the analysis code. In structural engineering, single LLMs have been used to generate OpenSeesPy [12] code for frame analysis [13] and beam analysis [14], as well as to produce structural drawings [15] and to build geotechnical numerical models [16, 17]. A single LLM, however, is prone to hallucination and error accumulation over long, multi-step tasks, producing plausible but incorrect code or numerical values [18]. Indeed, some systems have the LLM produce numerical results directly, without executing any code [19], which exposes a basic limitation: the quantitative computations that reliability analysis requires cannot be entrusted to an LLM alone. A common response to this limitation is to decompose the overall task across multiple cooperating, specialized agents and to delegate the produc-tion of numerical results to actual code execution rather than to the LLM. Such decomposition has been reported to reduce hallucination and error ac-cumulation in multi-step operations [18]. This pairing of a multi-agent or-ganization with code execution has become established across civil and con-struction engineering, with examples in reinforced-concrete design [20], BIM coordination [21], structural design workflows [22], frame modeling [23, 24], geotechnical design [25], and blast-safety assessment [26], as summarized in Table 1. A multi-agent organization combined with deterministic code exe-cution has thus become a widely adopted, common practice. 

1.2.2. Domain adaptation and fine-tuning of LLMs 

Although general-purpose LLMs often perform well on a wide range of tasks, their performance can degrade when they are applied to domain-specific and technically complex problems. To address this limitation, two broad adaptation strategies are commonly used. The first strategy keeps the 5Table 1: Application of large language models in engineering. None of the surveyed works targets structural reliability analysis ( β/Pf ) itself or fine-tunes the a priori selection of the analysis method. 

Reference Domain Task LLM(s) Agents Fine-tuning (target) Executes? Chen and Bao [20] RC design Code-compliant design DeepSeek-V3, GPT-4o Multi (4) No Yes (Python) Dong et al. [21] BIM NL BIM coordina-tion o1-mini, GPT-4 Multi (5) No Yes (Revit API) Liang et al. [13] Structural analysis NL frame analysis GPT-4o, Gemini, Llama Single No Yes (OpenSeesPy) Liang et al. [22] Structural design Design workflows GPT-4o, Claude Multi No Yes (OpenSeesPy) Geng et al. [23] Structural analysis 2D frame modeling Llama-3.3 70B Multi (5) No Yes (OpenSeesPy) Geng et al. [24] Structural analysis 3D frame modeling GPT-OSS, Llama-3.3 Multi No Yes (SAP2000) Zhang et al. [15] Structural drawings NL to drawings ChatGPT-3.5/4 Single No Yes (Auto-CAD) Liu et al. [14] Structural analysis Beam analysis Llama-3.3 70B Single No Yes (OpenSeesPy) Youwai et al. [19] Foundation design Foundation design calc. DeepSeek, GPT, Grok, Gemini Multi (router) No No Kim et al. [16] Geo-technical Numerical modeling ChatGPT-4Single No Yes (MAT-LAB) Kim et al. [17] Geo-technical FE model-ing ChatGPT o1 Single No Yes (FEniCS) Xu et al. [25] Geo-technical Footing design GPT-4o Multi (3) No Yes (Python) Wang et al. [26] Blast safety Safety as-sessment Qwen2.5, DeepSeek-R1 Multi (4) No Yes (Python) Shi et al. [27] Building codes Compliance scripting Mistral 7B Single QLoRA –gen. No Jiang and Chen [28] Building energy NL to en-ergy model T5-11B Single LoRA – gen. Yes (Energy-Plus) Dong et al. [29] CFD NL to CFD setup Qwen2.5-7B Multi (4) LoRA – gen. Yes (Open-FOAM) Zhang et al. [30] Contracts Contract QA DeepSeek-R1-Qwen-14B Single SFT+RL –QA No Aqib et al. [31] Building codes Code QA (RAG) Qwen, Llama, Phi Single PEFT – QA No 

This work Structural reliability 

Reliability analysis (β/Pf ) +method selection Gemma (E4B +26B) Multi (6) 

QLoRA –

a priori 

sel. 

Yes (det.) 

6model weights fixed and improves the input context through techniques such as prompt engineering or retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), in which relevant external knowledge is retrieved and appended to the user query. The second strategy modifies the model weights through fine-tuning, thereby en-abling deeper domain specialization. Among fine-tuning approaches, QLoRA [32] has become particularly attractive because it combines low-rank adap-tation (LoRA) [33] with 4-bit quantization, allowing large models to be fine-tuned efficiently on a single consumer-grade GPU. Fine-tuning has recently begun to appear in civil and construction en-gineering applications, mainly in two task categories. The first category is generation. For example, Shi et al. [27] fine-tuned a model using QLoRA to generate building-code-compliance scripts, while Jiang and Chen [28] fine-tuned a model to generate building-energy models from natural-language descriptions. A similar pattern is observed in multi-agent workflows that ex-ecute analysis code, where fine-tuning is primarily used to translate problem descriptions into solver configurations [29]. The second category is question answering. Zhang et al. [30] applied supervised fine-tuning with reinforce-ment learning to construction-contract question answering, and Aqib et al. [31] evaluated fine-tuning together with retrieval for building-code question answering. 

1.3. Knowledge gaps 

Structural reliability analysis requires an integrated workflow that con-nects problem formulation, method selection, numerical computation, and result interpretation. However, as summarized in Table 1, this workflow has not yet been systematically addressed in existing LLM-based engineering studies. This review reveals two major knowledge gaps. First, no existing LLM-based framework provides end-to-end automation for structural reliability analysis, from natural-language problem formulation to the estimation and interpretation of Pf and β. Existing reliability tools require expert-defined inputs, whereas general-purpose LLMs cannot be directly trusted for quan-titative reliability analysis because of hallucination and the need for deter-ministic computation. Second, and more importantly, the a priori selection of an appropriate reliability-analysis method remains largely unexplored in LLM-based engi-neering research. Method selection is not merely a code-generation or solver-routing task; it is a judgment-intensive decision that should be made before 7the desired reliability result is available. The analyst needs to infer, from the problem definition alone, which method is likely to provide sufficient accuracy at a reasonable computational cost. This decision requires simul-taneous consideration of the dimensionality of the random-variable space, the nonlinearity and geometry of the limit-state surface, the possible pres-ence of multiple failure regions, the expected rarity of failure, and the cost of each limit-state evaluation. An unsuitable choice can produce either ex-cessive computational demand or, more critically, a numerically valid but inaccurate estimate of Pf and β.Existing fine-tuning studies in civil and construction engineering have primarily targeted generation tasks, such as producing analysis scripts or solver configurations, or question-answering tasks based on technical docu-ments. These tasks do not address the distinct challenge of learning an expert decision rule for selecting an analysis method within an executable reliability-analysis pipeline. Thus, there remains a need for a domain-specialized LLM component that can perform reliable a priori method selection from a struc-tured problem description, without first executing all candidate methods or having access to the unknown reference solution. 

1.4. Contributions 

This work proposes a multi-agent LLM framework for structural reliabil-ity analysis. The contributions are twofold. First, we develop a multi-agent pipeline that enables non-experts to con-duct the full reliability-analysis workflow, from a natural-language problem statement to an interpreted result. Conventionally, method selection, limit-state formulation, solver execution, and result interpretation each require specialized knowledge. The proposed framework coordinates specialized com-ponents—the Orchestrator, Problem Analyst, Method Planner, Code Engi-neer, Runner, and Result Interpreter—to automate these tasks, while del-egating the computation of numerical reliability estimates to deterministic code execution. The system is built entirely on open-weight models, us-ing Gemma 4 E4B for the Method Planner and Gemma 4 26B-A4B for the remaining agents [34]. This design avoids dependence on closed APIs and supports local execution, thereby improving accessibility and reproducibility. The pipeline is demonstrated on a running example—the buckling reliability of a slender steel column— in Section 2.4 and evaluated across twenty bench-mark problems in Section 3.2, where it produces interpretable estimates of β

and Pf without expert intervention. 8Second, we fine-tune only the Method Planner using QLoRA, targeting the most judgment-intensive step in the workflow: reliability-method selec-tion. Selecting an appropriate analysis method requires expert judgment be-cause the suitability of a method depends on problem characteristics such as dimensionality, limit-state nonlinearity, failure-domain geometry, target fail-ure probability, and computational cost. General-purpose LLMs may there-fore make unreliable choices, often relying on surface-level problem features or defaulting to familiar methods such as FORM. To address this limitation, we use expert-defined method-selection rules as training data to specialize the Method Planner for a priori method-category selection before numerical analysis is performed. The effectiveness of this specialization is confirmed by the method-category selection accuracy on held-out benchmark prob-lems in Section 3. Using only 150 curated training examples, the compact open-weight Method Planner model outperforms its unadapted counterpart, surpasses the unadapted performance of a substantially larger model, and reduces the single-method bias observed in general-purpose models. 

1.5. Paper organization 

Section 2 presents the proposed multi-agent framework: the problem formulation, the structured data contracts and agent design, the QLoRA fine-tuning of the Method Planner, the user interface, and an end-to-end demonstration on a running example. Section 3 evaluates the framework on the twenty benchmark problems in terms of code-execution success rate and method-category selection accuracy, and compares the fine-tuned Method Planner against baseline models. Section 4 discusses the implications and limitations of the results, and Section 5 concludes the paper. 

2. Proposed approach 

This section presents the architecture of the multi-agent framework and the design of the individual agents (Section 2.1), the fine-tuning of the Method Planner (Section 2.2), the user interface (Section 2.3), and an end-to-end walkthrough of the running example — a slender steel column under Euler buckling (Section 2.4). 

2.1. Multi-agent framework 

The proposed framework consists of five LLM-based agents and one de-terministic execution component, which are sequentially connected as illus-trated in Fig. 2: the Orchestrator, Problem Analyst, Method Planner, Code 9User                 

> (NL input)
> Orchestrator
> Intent routing
> Problem Analyst
> NL →ProblemSpec
> Method Planner
> Method category
> [QLoRA fine-tuned] Code Engineer
> Spec+plan →code
> Runner
> Non-LLM tool
> Code →β, Pf
> Result Interpreter
> β, Pf →meaning
> Output
> β, Pf,
> engineering interpretation
> Clarifier loop
> Missing fields →question →reply
> Confirmation gates
> (1) Confirm category (2) Pick method (Advanced)
> Refinement offer
> SORM / IS (FORM only)
> reliability_llm.solvers
> In-house Python solvers
> Re-run
> Legend: LLM agent Deterministic tool (Runner) Backend solver User input / output Human-in-the-loop

Figure 2: Multi-agent framework for structural reliability analysis. Green marks the human-in-the-loop interaction points. At any point, the Orchestrator can answer general questions directly or route to the Method Planner or Result Interpreter (paths not shown). 

Engineer, Runner, and Result Interpreter. The Orchestrator classifies user intent and routes it to the appropriate agent, or answers general questions directly. The Problem Analyst converts natural-language input into a structured problem specification—the random variables with their distribu-tions, the limit-state function, and the correlation structure. The Method Planner selects the method category suited to the problem; it is the only fine-tuned agent, specialized to recommend the appropriate category (Sec-tion 2.2). The Code Engineer turns the problem specification and the selected method into executable code that calls the backend solver. The 

Runner is a deterministic, non-LLM tool that executes this code in an iso-lated subprocess and extracts the reliability index β and the failure proba-bility Pf . Lastly, the Result Interpreter turns these numerical results into an engineering interpretation. In the proposed framework, three aspects are particularly important. First, the intermediate outputs of the reliability-analysis workflow are pro-duced sequentially by the corresponding agents. The LLM agents do not autonomously revise or repeat the outputs of previous stages, and the inter-10 faces between stages are fixed by the data contracts defined in Section 2.1.1. Second, the reliability index β and the failure probability Pf are never gen-erated directly by an LLM. They are produced solely by the Runner, which is a deterministic non-LLM component that executes the solver code. This design makes the numerical results reproducible and verifiable, while reduc-ing the risk that LLM hallucinations propagate into the reported reliability estimates. Third, this sequential ordering applies only to the internal anal-ysis workflow; the user-facing interaction is not constrained to a fixed linear sequence, as described in Section 2.1.4. 

2.1.1. Structured data contracts 

The proposed framework is designed to follow the logical structure of structural reliability analysis. Each hand-off between agents is represented by a typed object, hereafter referred to as a data contract following the design-by-contract principle [35]. Each data contract specifies the required fields, their formats, and the information to be passed to the next stage. An agent’s output is forwarded only after it satisfies the corresponding specification. By explicitly encoding the domain structure in the aforementioned way, errors such as missing random variables, malformed fields, inconsistent dis-tribution definitions, or ill-formed limit-state functions can be detected at the stage where they are produced. Furthermore, because all intermediate outputs are stored in structured form, the analysis remains traceable: the reported reliability index β and failure probability Pf can be traced back to the problem specification, selected method, generated code, and execution result. This traceability supports the reproducibility required for reliability assessment in design-verification contexts. From the user’s natural-language input to the final engineering interpre-tation, the framework defines five core data contracts: ProblemSpec for prob-lem definition, AnalysisPlan for method-category selection, GeneratedCode 

for executable code, ExecutionResult for the computed β and Pf , and 

EngineeringInterpretation for the result summary, reliability-level as-sessment, target comparison, and caveats. Table 2 summarizes these data contracts and the information passed between stages. The routing and con-firmation logic is described separately in Section 2.1.3 and Section 2.1.4. 

2.1.2. Agent design 

This section presents the internal design of each agent, focusing on the dis-tinctive mechanism by which each component processes its input and passes 11 Table 2: The five core data contracts, the agent that produces each, and the information each passes to the next stage.                

> Data contract Produced by Information passed downstream
> ProblemSpec Problem Analyst Random variables (each with its distribu-tion, mean, and standard deviation), the limit-state function g(X), and the corre-lation matrix
> AnalysisPlan Method Planner A single recommended method category (FORM-based, MCS, or Advanced)
> GeneratedCode Code Engineer Executable Python code that calls the backend solver
> ExecutionResult Runner Whether execution succeeded, with the reliability index βand failure probability
> Pf(or error information on failure)
> Engineering Interpretation
> Result Interpreter A result summary, a reliability level, a comparison to the target, and caveats

structured information to the next stage. 

Orchestrator. The Orchestrator serves as the entry point of the framework and classifies each incoming user message into one of five intents: a new problem, a modification to an existing problem, a request to explain a re-sult, a general question, or a reply to a clarification request. Although this step does not involve reliability computation, it determines the downstream path of the workflow and therefore functions as the system’s gateway. By representing the user intent as an explicit type, the Orchestrator separates routing from domain-specific reasoning, allowing subsequent tasks such as problem extraction, method selection, code generation, and interpretation to be handled by dedicated agents. 

Problem Analyst. The Problem Analyst converts free-form natural-language input into a structured problem specification, represented by the ProblemSpec 

data contract. It extracts the random variables, their probability distribu-tions and statistical parameters, the limit-state function, and the correlation structure. It also maps loosely stated distribution names in the user input to the distribution families supported by the backend solver. If a required item is missing or ambiguous, the Problem Analyst does not infer the missing in-formation by assumption; instead, it initiates the clarification loop described 12 in Section 2.1.4. 

Method Planner. The Method Planner (hereafter the Planner) receives the 

ProblemSpec and selects a single reliability-method category suited to the problem. Among the various methods available for structural reliability anal-ysis, this study considers three categories: (i) the FORM-based category, which includes FORM, SORM, and FORM-based importance sampling; (ii) the MCS category, which corresponds to crude Monte Carlo simulation; and (iii) the Advanced category, which includes advanced sampling techniques such as subset simulation, cross-entropy-based importance sampling, sequen-tial importance sampling, and combination line sampling. The selection of the specific method within the chosen category is deferred to a later stage, as described in Section 2.1.3. Selecting an appropriate category a priori is particularly challenging be-cause the decision needs to be made before any reliability analysis has been performed and before the resulting Pf , β, convergence behavior, or method-specific approximation error is known. The Planner should therefore infer, from the problem specification alone, which category is likely to provide suf-ficient accuracy at a reasonable computational cost. This inference requires simultaneous consideration of problem characteristics such as dimensional-ity, limit-state nonlinearity, failure-domain geometry, expected failure rarity, and model-evaluation cost. In practice, the most reliable way to identify the best-performing method would be to execute multiple candidate methods and compare their results; however, doing so would defeat the purpose of efficient method selection. Because this difficult pre-analysis decision requires sub-stantial domain-specific judgment, the Planner is the only fine-tuned agent in the framework. The fine-tuning procedure and rationale are described in Section 2.2. Although the present study focuses on these three categories, the same procedure can be extended to additional reliability-analysis methods in future work. 

Code Engineer. The Code Engineer receives the problem specification and the selected method, and generates complete, executable Python code that calls the backend reliability solver. To support this process, we developed a unified solver library based on established reliability-analysis literature and software [1, 10, 11]. Moreover, the generated code is required to satisfy a fixed output format: it prints β and Pf on the final two lines in a predefined format so that the Runner can parse the results deterministically. Thus, the 13 Code Engineer does not generate arbitrary free-form analysis code; instead, it translates the structured specification into a standardized solver call with a fixed interface to the execution stage. 

Runner. The Runner is a deterministic, non-LLM execution component that operates as a node in the workflow graph. It executes the code generated by the Code Engineer in an isolated subprocess and parses β and Pf from the standard output using the predefined format. If both values are successfully parsed, the execution is marked as successful. Otherwise, the Runner returns structured error information, including the failure type, such as a parse failure or runtime exception. Executing the generated code in isolation prevents faults in the code from affecting the wider system, while ensuring that the subsequent interpretation stage always receives a structured execution result. 

Result Interpreter. The Result Interpreter converts the numerical outputs of the Runner into an engineering interpretation. It summarizes the reliability result, classifies the reliability level into one of five discrete categories ranging from very low to very high, compares the result with the target reliability level, and reports relevant caveats. If the execution fails, the Result Inter-preter reports the failure and its type rather than attempting to interpret unavailable or invalid numerical results. Among the six components, the full system prompt of the Planner is reproduced in Appendix Appendix A, because the fine-tuning procedure in Section 2.2 and the evaluation in Section 3 depend directly on this prompt. The prompts of the remaining agents are provided in the public code repos-itory accompanying this paper, as stated in the data availability statement. 

2.1.3. Framework flow 

Each user message is first received by the Orchestrator. When the mes-sage describes a new reliability problem, the Orchestrator passes it to the Problem Analyst to start the analysis, and the workflow then proceeds seri-ally in the order shown in Fig. 2: the Planner recommends a method category, the Code Engineer generates the solver-calling code, the Runner executes it, and the Result Interpreter translates the numerical results into an engineer-ing interpretation. General questions that do not require a reliability analysis are answered directly without entering the pipeline. When the session already contains a completed analysis, the Orchestrator instead routes the message to an intermediate point of the pipeline. Requests 14 that modify the problem specification return to the Problem Analyst, which updates the specification; requests to repeat the analysis with a different method are sent to the Planner; and requests for further explanation of a result are sent to the Result Interpreter. In each case, the workflow resumes from the routed point and proceeds in the same order as before. Whether on a first run or on re-entry, the progression pauses at four points where additional information or user confirmation is required, as described in Section 2.1.4. 

2.1.4. Human-in-the-loop interaction 

The proposed framework does not execute the full reliability-analysis workflow as an unattended black box. Instead, it adopts a human-in-the-loop design [36], in which routine computational steps proceed automatically but the workflow pauses at decision points that can affect the course of the anal-ysis. This allows non-expert users to retain control over important choices, while the agents handle the technical tasks of problem structuring, method planning, code generation, execution, and result interpretation. The workflow pauses for user input at four points (Table 3). First, during problem definition, the Problem Analyst may identify missing or ambiguous items in the extracted ProblemSpec . In that case, the Clarifier requests only the required information from the user, asking again if necessary, and the workflow resumes once the replies complete the problem specification. This prevents incomplete or ambiguous inputs from propagating into method se-lection and numerical analysis. Second, after the Planner recommends a reliability-method category, the system asks the user to confirm the recom-mendation or switch to another category. This gate allows the user to retain control over the overall analysis strategy before code generation and numer-ical execution begin. Third, if the Advanced category is confirmed, the user is asked to select a specific advanced sampling method before code genera-tion begins. This additional gate is required because the Advanced category includes multiple methods with different assumptions, tuning requirements, and computational characteristics. Fourth, after a first-pass FORM-based analysis is completed, the system offers a one-time refinement using SORM or FORM-based importance sampling when a more accurate or robust esti-mate may be desirable. At each gate, the user can either proceed with the proposed step, re-quest an explanation, or redirect the conversation. When an explanation is requested, the system answers the question and then returns to the same decision point. When the user changes to an unrelated topic, the message 15 Table 3: The four human-in-the-loop gates at which the workflow pauses for user input. At any gate, a question is answered and the same gate is presented again, and a message unrelated to the pending decision is routed back to the Orchestrator; declining the refine-ment offer ends the analysis. 

Gate User reply Next step Clarifier Supplies the missing in-formation Problem Analyst (specifica-tion completed) Category confirmation Accepts or switches the category Code Engineer for FORM-based and MCS (auto-matic); the gate below for Advanced Advanced method selection Picks a specific method (e.g., SuS, SIS, CLS) Code Engineer Refinement offer Accepts SORM or FORM-based impor-tance sampling Code Engineer (re-run) 

is routed back to the Orchestrator. This design preserves the sequential structure of the internal analysis workflow while allowing flexible user-facing interaction. Fig. 3 illustrates a representative human-in-the-loop interaction using the running-example column problem. In this example, the Clarifier first re-quests a missing input, the user then asks for an explanation at the category-confirmation gate, and the analysis proceeds after the user confirms the rec-ommended category. These confirmation stages allow non-expert users to guide the analysis at key decision points without needing to understand the full internal machinery of structural reliability analysis. 

2.2. Fine-tuning the Planner 

In the proposed framework, all LLM-based agents are used without task-specific fine-tuning, except for the Planner. This design choice represents the distinct role of the Planner in the workflow. While the other agents mainly perform language understanding, structured extraction, code gener-ation, or result explanation under task-specific prompts, the Planner make an a priori decision about which reliability-method category is most appro-priate for a given problem. In this study, the Planner selects one of three categories: FORM-based, MCS, or Advanced. This decision is difficult be-16 User 

I want the probability that an axially loaded steel column fails by buckling. It is 3 m long (normal, std 0.03 m); its second moment of area is lognormal with mean 8.33e-6 m^4 and std 4.0e-7; the axial load is Gumbel with mean 1000 kN and std 200 kN. The elastic modulus averages 200 GPa. 

> Clarifier

A reliability analysis needs the uncertainty in each variable. Could you give the standard deviation and distribution of the elastic modulus? 

> User

Lognormal, with a standard deviation of 10 GPa. 

> Category confirmation gate

For this problem I recommend the FORM-based category. Shall I proceed? 

> User

Alright, please proceed. 

> Running the analysis

Running the analysis and interpreting the result. 

> User

How do the methods differ? 

> Explanation

FORM is fast but accurate only when the limit state is nearly linear; MCS makes no such assumption but needs many samples for rare events. Here the limit state is smooth and failure is not too rare, so FORM is appropriate. Ask a question Return Proceed (accept) Figure 3: A representative human-in-the-loop interaction for the running-example column problem (Section 2.4). User messages are shown on the right and system messages on the left; green marks the human-in-the-loop interaction points—the Clarifier requesting a missing input, the category-confirmation gate, and an on-demand explanation that returns to the gate (curved arrow). At each gate the user may accept, ask a question, or change direction, allowing a non-expert to steer the analysis without expert knowledge. 

17 cause the most suitable method is the one that achieves sufficient accuracy with reasonable computational cost, but this trade-off is generally not known before the analysis is performed. As discussed in Section 1.1, each category has distinct advantages and limitations. Selecting an appropriate category therefore requires expert judgment that simultaneously considers the dimen-sionality of the problem, the nonlinearity of the limit-state function, the expected magnitude of the failure probability, and the computational cost of model evaluations. To embed this selection expertise into the Planner, this study fine-tunes the Planner using QLoRA [33, 32]. The training objective is to map a struc-tured problem specification to the method category that would be acceptable to an expert prior to conducting the analysis. To construct the training la-bels, we define a deterministic reference standard. Each training problem is solved offline using all candidate solvers in the backend library, and the resulting reference estimates are compared to assign the method-category label. In particular, rare-event problems with β > 3.5 are assigned to the Advanced category, regardless of the degree of nonlinearity, because rarity takes precedence in the method-selection criterion. For the remaining prob-lems, the label is assigned to the FORM-based category when the FORM estimate remains within 5% of the MCS reference result; otherwise, the prob-lem is assigned to the MCS category. The threshold β = 3 .5 is adopted as a representative target reliability level commonly used in design-oriented re-liability assessment. Figure 4 illustrates how this criterion partitions the rarity–nonlinearity plane into the three method-category regions. The label-ing rule used in this study represents one possible expert-defined criterion. If a different criterion is preferred, the training labels can be regenerated accordingly, and the Planner can be retrained using the same QLoRA-based procedure. The Planner is fine-tuned on 150 synthetic supervised examples, each mapping a problem specification to a method category. Each label is as-signed using the same deterministic reference standard later used for the held-out benchmark in Section 3.1. The model input is constructed from the problem specification alone, using the same input format during fine-tuning and deployment. Fine-tuning uses QLoRA with Gemma 4 E4B [34] as the base model. The base weights are quantized to 4 bits and frozen, and only a low-rank adapter is trained with rank 16 and α = 16 . The model is trained for 4 epochs using a learning rate of 2 × 10 −4, an effective batch size of 4, the 8-bit AdamW optimizer [37], and a linear learning-rate schedule. 18 Figure 4: The deterministic reference criterion used to assign training labels. Rare failures (β > 3.5) route to Advanced regardless of nonlinearity (rarity takes precedence); other-wise the label is FORM-based when FORM’s linearization stays within 5% of the MCS reliability index, and MCS when it does not. The boundary values ( β = 3 .5, 5%) are a replaceable design choice. 

Training and subsequent evaluation in Section 3 are conducted on a single RTX A5000 GPU with 24 GB of memory. The implementation uses Un-sloth’s FastModel loader [38], with only the language layers trained and the vision tower kept frozen, allowing the 4-bit QLoRA setup to fit within the available GPU memory. The key distinction between training and deployment is that the method-category labels are obtained from a posteriori information during training but should be predicted a priori during inference. During training, the costly reference computations are performed only once offline to generate the super-vised labels. At deployment, however, such reference results are unavailable because obtaining β and Pf is precisely the purpose of the reliability analy-sis. The fine-tuned Planner is therefore expected to reproduce the expert-like category decision from the problem specification alone, without running all candidate methods. This distinction is illustrated in Fig. 5: during training, the reference results are available for label generation, whereas during infer-ence, the Planner selects the method category before numerical computation is performed. 19 (a) Training — label derived a posteriori                          

> FORM-based β,Pf
> MCS β,Pf
> Advanced β,Pf
> ProblemSpec Method Planner
> Run —offline sweep (all solvers)
> QLoRA update
> Reference results computed (β,Pf)Selected category

(b) Inference — decision a priori      

> FORM-based ?
> MCS ?
> Advanced ?
> ProblemSpec Method Planner
> (fine-tuned)

Figure 5: Training versus inference for the Planner. (a) During training, each problem is solved once, offline, with every solver in the backend library; the gold category assigned by the deterministic rule supervises the QLoRA update. (b) At deployment, no reference results exist: the fine-tuned Planner selects the category a priori , from the problem spec-ification alone. Gray-shaded boxes carry the computed reference results ( β, Pf ); the blue border marks the selected category. 

2.3. User interface 

To make the preceding workflow accessible to non-expert users, the frame-work provides a chat-based web interface implemented with Streamlit [39], which runs locally together with the agents and the backend solvers. The user describes a reliability problem in natural language, and the system replies with the outputs of the workflow stages described in Section 2.1.3. The human-in-the-loop gates appear as explicit pauses within this conversation: when the workflow reaches a decision point, the interface indicates that the system is awaiting a reply, and the user responds through the same chat in-20 put, as summarized in Table 3. Fig. 6(a) shows this interaction for the run-ning example (Section 2.4), where the category recommended by the Planner is presented at the confirmation gate. In addition to the conversational replies, each system turn provides a trace panel that exposes the intermediate outputs of that turn, which correspond one-to-one to the data contracts of Table 2. Fig. 6(b) shows this panel after problem extraction and method planning. The trace panel thus makes the traceability provided by the data contracts (Section 2.1.1) directly accessible in the interface: the user can inspect how the reported β and Pf were obtained without leaving the conversation. The analysis turn closes with a conversational reply that returns the in-terpreted result to the user. Fig. 7 shows this closing reply for the running example: the engineering interpretation of the computed β and Pf is followed by the one-time refinement offer available after a first-pass FORM-based anal-ysis (Section 2.1.4). 

2.4. Running example 

This section demonstrates the proposed multi-agent framework using the buckling reliability of a slender steel column under axial compression. The user provides the following natural-language input. “A slender column checked against Euler buckling. The elastic modulus E (MPa) is lognormal with mean 200000 and standard deviation 10000. The second moment of area I (m 4) is lognormal with mean 8.33 × 10 −6 and standard deviation 4 × 10 −7. The column length L (m) is normal with mean 3.0 and standard devi-ation 0.03. The axial load P (kN) follows a Gumbel distribution with mean 1000 and standard deviation 200. All variables are in-dependent. Failure occurs when the axial load exceeds the Euler critical buckling load (limit state g = π2 · E · 1000 · I/L 2 − P ).” The limit-state function is the Euler-buckling margin g(X) = Pcr − P ,where Pcr = π2EI/L 2 is the critical buckling load. The factor of 10 3 in the quoted expression converts E from MPa to kN m −2, so that Pcr and P

are expressed in the same unit, kN. Failure ( g(X) ≤ 0) occurs when the applied axial load exceeds the buckling capacity. The four random variables are summarized in Table 4. The workflow begins with the Orchestrator , which classifies the input as a new reliability-analysis request and routes it to the Problem Analyst. The 21 (b) 

(a) Figure 6: Chat-based web interface of the framework, shown for the running-example col-umn problem (Section 2.4): (a) the natural-language input and the category-confirmation gate; (b) the trace panel of the same turn, exposing the data contracts of Table 2. 

22 Figure 7: Closing reply of the analysis turn for the running example: the engineering interpretation of the computed β and Pf , followed by the one-time refinement offer (Sec-tion 2.1.4). 

Problem Analyst then converts the free-form statement into the structured 

ProblemSpec defined in Section 2.1.1. For this example, it extracts the four random variables and their distributions, namely E and I as lognormal vari-ables, L as a normal variable, and P as a Gumbel variable. It also translates the limit-state function into the machine-evaluable expression (np.pi**2 * E * 1000 * I) / (L**2) - P and records the stated independence of the variables as an empty correlation matrix. Because the input already provides all required distributions and parameters, the specification is judged complete and the workflow proceeds without entering the Clarifier loop. Fig. 8 shows the resulting ProblemSpec .23 Table 4: Random variables of the running example (slender steel column, Euler buckling). CoV denotes the coefficient of variation. Symbol Description Distribution Unit Mean Std. dev. CoV 

E Elastic modulus Lognormal MPa 2.00 × 10 5 1.00 × 10 4 0.05 

I Second moment of area Lognormal m4 8.33 × 10 −6 4.00 × 10 −7 0.05 

L Column length Normal m 3.00 0.03 0.01 

P Axial load Gumbel kN 1000 200 0.20 ProblemSpec · structured  problem  specification Problem Analyst                                                 

> random_variables:
> Elognormal mean=2.00e+05 std=1.00e+04 #E-modulus (MPa)
> Ilognormal mean=8.33e-06 std=4.00e-07 #2nd moment (m ⁴)
> Lnormal mean=3.00 std=0.03 #length (m)
> Pgumbel mean=1000.0 std=200.0 #axial load (kN) limit_state_expr:
> (np.pi**2 *E*1000 *I) /(L**2) -Pcorrelation: none specified
> Limit-state function
> g=π²EI /L²−P,the Euler-buckling margin from the Problem Analyst

Figure 8: Structured ProblemSpec produced by the Problem Analyst from the natural-language input of the running example: four random variables with their distributions and parameters, and the limit-state expression. 

Using the ProblemSpec , the Planner recommends the FORM-based cat-egory. This recommendation is consistent with the problem characteristics: the limit-state function is smooth and differentiable, and the failure probabil-ity is not in an extremely rare range, with an expected order of approximately 

10 −3. The recommendation is presented at the user-confirmation gate, where the user accepts the suggested category. The subsequent method-resolution step therefore selects FORM as the concrete method within the FORM-based category. The Code Engineer then converts the finalized specification and selected method into a self-contained Python script. The generated code im-ports the in-house reliability_llm.solvers package, constructs the joint distribution and limit-state function, calls the FORM solver, and prints the results in the fixed output format required in Section 2.1.2. The core of the generated script is shown in Fig. 9. The reliability computation is performed by the backend solver, solve_form , while the Code Engineer translates the 24 GeneratedCode · run_analysis.py (core excerpt) Code Engineer                

> distr =build_joint_distribution(spec) lsf =build_lsf(spec) result =solve_form(distr, lsf) print(f"beta ={result.beta:.6f}") print(f"pf ={result.pf:.6e}")
> Output contract
> The last two lines print
> βand Pfin a fixed format, parsed by the Runner

Figure 9: Core of the self-contained Python script generated by the Code Engineer for the running example. The specification is turned into a joint distribution and a limit-state function, the validated FORM solver is invoked, and the results are printed on the last two lines per the output format. 

structured specification into the corresponding solver call. The Runner executes the generated code in an isolated subprocess and parses the beta and pf values from standard output. For this example, the execution succeeds and yields a reliability index of β = 2 .663 and a failure probability of Pf = 3 .87 × 10 −3. Finally, the Result Interpreter con-verts these numerical values into an engineering interpretation following the 

EngineeringInterpretation data contract in Table 2. The interpretation includes a concise summary, a reliability rating, a comparison with a target reliability level, and relevant caveats. The generated summary is as follows: “The reliability index β = 2 .663 corresponds to a failure prob-ability of approximately 3.87 × 10 −3, or about 1 in 258. This indicates a moderate level of reliability.” The target comparison indicates that the result is lower than the reference value β = 3 .8 specified in Eurocode EN 1990 for the ultimate limit state over a 50-year reference period. The interpretation also highlights three points relevant to the reliability estimate: the linearization approximation used in FORM, possible physical dependence among the variables despite the stated independence assumption, and the representativeness of the Gumbel tail model for the axial load; Fig. 7 shows how this interpretation is returned to the user in the interface. Thus, the framework provides both numerical 25 Table 5: Coverage of the held-out benchmark (20 problems). 

Property Coverage Number of problems 20 (held-out) Probability distributions 11 types (normal, lognormal, Gumbel, Weibull, Fréchet, Beta, chi-square, expo-nential, Rayleigh, Type-I/III smallest) Dimension (# random variables) 2–30 LSF nonlinearity linear / mild / strong Method category (label) FORM-based 8 · MCS 6 · Advanced 6 estimates of β and Pf and their engineering meaning, improving accessibility for non-expert users. 

3. Experiments 

3.1. Benchmark suite 

To evaluate the proposed framework, we construct a held-out benchmark consisting of 20 hand-authored structural reliability problems. These prob-lems are disjoint from the 150 synthetic dataset used to train the Planner and are therefore used to assess generalization to unseen reliability-analysis cases. As summarized in Table 5, the benchmark covers diverse conditions, including 11 probability distribution types, problem dimensions ranging from 2 to 30 random variables, linear to strongly nonlinear limit-state functions, and failure probabilities ranging from common to rare events. This diversity allows the benchmark to test the framework under conditions where no single reliability method is uniformly suitable. The running example of Section 2.4 corresponds to problem p04 of this benchmark. The benchmark is used for two evaluations. The first is the end-to-end execution evaluation of the full pipeline in Section 3.2. In this evaluation, a run is considered successful when the Code Engineer generates executable code and the Runner returns parseable estimates of β and Pf . The pipeline results are then compared with reference solutions obtained from validated solvers. For most problems, the reference solution is taken from the MCS result of the per-problem solver sweep. For rare-event problems in which the MCS reference does not achieve the target coefficient of variation, the subset 26 Table 6: End-to-end execution results on the 20 benchmark problems, compared against the reference solutions. References are the MCS results of the per-problem sweep with the validated solvers; † marks rare-event problems whose MCS reference does not reach the target coefficient of variation, for which the subset simulation reference is shown. The generated code executed and produced a valid β and Pf on all 20 problems. 

Predicted Reference Proposed Problem category (method) β Pf β Pf

p01 R–S (normal) FORM-based (FORM) 4.148 1.7 × 10 −5 4.160 1.6 × 10 −5

p02 beam yield FORM-based (FORM) 1.574 5.8 × 10 −2 1.562 5.9 × 10 −2

p03 concrete compression FORM-based (FORM) 4.385 5.8 × 10 −6 4.397 5.5 × 10 −6

p04 column buckling (Euler) FORM-based (FORM) 2.649 4.0 × 10 −3 2.663 3.9 × 10 −3

p05 exponential ratio MCS (MCS) 2.733 3.1 × 10 −3 2.731 3.2 × 10 −3

p06 trig. oscillator MCS (MCS) 3.585 1.7 × 10 −4 3.515 2.2 × 10 −4

p07 fatigue (Weibull) MCS (MCS) 2.489 6.4 × 10 −3 2.489 6.4 × 10 −3

p08 containment (rare) Advanced (SuS) 3.930 4.2 × 10 −5 4.007 3.1 × 10 −5

p09 pile group (corr.) MCS (MCS) 0.817 2.1 × 10 −1 0.943 1.7 × 10 −1

p10 offshore jacket (10 RV) † FORM-based (FORM) 5.506 1.8 × 10 −8 5.967 1.2 × 10 −9

p11 bounded resistance (Beta) FORM-based (FORM) 2.194 1.4 × 10 −2 2.247 1.2 × 10 −2

p12 slope (Mohr–Coulomb) MCS (MCS) 3.022 1.3 × 10 −3 3.011 1.3 × 10 −3

p13 vibration (chi-square) MCS (MCS) 0.819 2.1 × 10 −1 0.794 2.1 × 10 −1

p14 wind extreme (Fréchet) Advanced (SuS) 2.161 1.5 × 10 −2 2.097 1.8 × 10 −2

p15 wave overtopping (Rayleigh) FORM-based (FORM) 2.183 1.5 × 10 −2 2.178 1.5 × 10 −2

p16 bridge girder (corr. loads) FORM-based (FORM) 1.998 2.3 × 10 −2 3.032 1.2 × 10 −3

p17 parallel system (30 RV) † Advanced (SuS) 4.783 8.6 × 10 −7 4.783 8.6 × 10 −7

p18 yield (Type-I smallest) Advanced (SIS) 2.178 1.5 × 10 −2 2.193 1.4 × 10 −2

p19 shifted (Type-III smallest) Advanced (CLS) 1.644 5.0 × 10 −2 1.650 4.9 × 10 −2

p20 exponential degradation Advanced (SuS) 2.045 2.0 × 10 −2 2.081 1.9 × 10 −2

simulation result is used as the reference instead. The resulting end-to-end execution results are summarized in Table 6. The second evaluation concerns the method-selection accuracy of the Planner in Section 3.3. For this purpose, each benchmark problem is as-signed a reference method category using the deterministic labeling criterion described in Section 2.2. Specifically, each problem is solved offline using the reliability-analysis methods considered in this study, and the resulting reference estimates of β and Pf are used to assign the method-category label. The same labeling rule used to train the Planner is applied to the benchmark problems. Under this rule, the 20 benchmark problems are divided into 8 FORM-based, 6 MCS, and 6 Advanced cases, as also reported in Table 5. 

3.2. End-to-end execution 

The proposed framework successfully completed the full execution work-flow for all 20 benchmark problems. In every case, the Code Engineer gener-ated executable code, and the Runner returned parseable estimates of β and 27 Pf , as reported in Table 6. For most problems, the pipeline estimates are close to the reference solutions, with the reliability-index difference generally within ∆β ≤ 0.1. This result indicates that the framework can translate natural-language reliability problems into executable analyses and produce numerical reliability estimates consistently. The main discrepancy occurs in p16, where the pipeline gives β = 3 .03 ,compared with the reference value of β = 2 .00 . This discrepancy is caused by method selection rather than code execution. The problem has a strongly nonlinear limit-state function, for which FORM and MCS give substantially different results. However, the framework provides a built-in recovery path for exactly this situation: as described in Section 2.1.4, after the first-pass FORM-based analysis, the user is offered a one-time refinement using SORM or FORM-based importance sampling, so that a questionable FORM esti-mate need not be accepted as the final answer. By contrast, cases in which the framework selected an advanced method for problems that could also be handled by simpler methods, such as p14 and p18–p20, did not lead to a substantial loss of accuracy. These cases mainly increase computational cost. Overall, the results show that the framework can complete the end-to-end reliability-analysis workflow without expert intervention, while also indicating that accurate method selection is critical to the quality of the final reliability estimates. 

3.3. Evaluation of the Planner 

This section evaluates the Planner independently from the rest of the pipeline. Each model receives the same prompt and the same ProblemSpec 

for each held-out benchmark problem, and its predicted method category is compared with the reference label. The rest of the pipeline is not executed in this evaluation, so the result measures only the Planner’s ability to select the appropriate method category. Three open-weight configurations are compared: (i) Gemma 4 E4B with-out fine-tuning, using prompting only; (ii) Gemma 4 26B-A4B without fine-tuning, which is the backbone used for the non-Planner agents in the deployed framework; and (iii) Gemma 4 E4B with Planner-only QLoRA fine-tuning, which is the proposed Planner. The prompt is identical across the three configurations and is reproduced in Appendix Appendix A. The evaluation metric is category accuracy, reported both overall and separately for the FORM-based, MCS, and Advanced categories. 28 Fig. 10 shows the category-selection results as confusion matrices. The fine-tuned E4B Planner achieves the highest overall accuracy, 60%, compared with 45% for the untuned E4B model and 50% for the larger untuned 26B-A4B model. More importantly, the fine-tuned Planner gives more balanced predictions across the three categories. The two untuned models predict the FORM-based category for most problems, achieving high accuracy on FORM-based cases but poor recall for the MCS and Advanced categories. This bias is the unfavorable direction of misselection: because FORM re-lies on a first-order approximation of the limit-state surface, applying it to strongly nonlinear or rare-event problems can yield a numerically valid but biased estimate. In contrast, the fine-tuned Planner correctly identifies 4/8 FORM-based, 4/6 MCS, and 4/6 Advanced cases, indicating improved dis-crimination among the method categories. This result suggests that model scale alone is insufficient for the closed-set method-selection task. Even when the decision criteria and worked examples are provided in the prompt, the un-tuned models tend to default to the majority or more familiar FORM-based category, whereas Planner-only fine-tuning improves the model’s ability to apply the selection rule consistently, particularly for the minority MCS and Advanced categories. These results support the design choice of specializ-ing only the Planner, rather than relying solely on a larger general-purpose model. 

4. Discussion 

4.1. Accessibility and trustworthiness of the framework 

The main significance of the proposed framework is that it lowers the expertise barrier of structural reliability analysis while preserving compu-tational trustworthiness. The framework enables users to proceed from a natural-language problem statement to interpreted estimates of β and Pf .However, these numerical quantities are not generated by an LLM. They are obtained through deterministic execution of validated reliability solvers, which reduces the risk of hallucinated numerical results and makes the re-ported estimates reproducible. Trustworthiness is further supported by the structured workflow. Because intermediate outputs are stored through data contracts, the final reliability estimates can be traced back to the problem specification, selected method, generated code, and execution result. This traceability is important in design-verification contexts, where reliability as-29 FORM-based 

> MCS
> Advanced
> Predicted
> FORM-based
> MCS
> Advanced
> True

(a)       

> 1.00 0.00 0.00
> 0.83 0.17 0.00
> 1.00 0.00 0.00
> FORM-based
> MCS
> Advanced
> Predicted

(b)       

> 1.00 0.00 0.00
> 0.67 0.33 0.00
> 0.83 0.17 0.00
> FORM-based
> MCS
> Advanced
> Predicted

(c)        

> 0.50 0.12 0.38
> 0.17 0.67 0.17
> 0.17 0.17 0.67
> Correct Misclassified

Figure 10: Confusion matrices of method-category selection on the held-out benchmark (n = 20 ; class sizes: FORM-based 8, MCS 6, Advanced 6). Each row is normalized to sum to one, so the diagonal entries are the per-class recall. Green marks correct predictions (the diagonal) and red marks misclassifications (off-diagonal), with colour saturation propor-tional to the fraction. (a) Gemma 4 E4B without fine-tuning (overall 45%); (b) Gemma 4 26B-A4B without fine-tuning (50%); (c) Gemma 4 E4B with planner-only QLoRA (ours, 60%). The two models without fine-tuning, (a) and (b), collapse onto the FORM-based column—predicting FORM-based even for the MCS and Advanced problems—whereas the fine-tuned model (c) recovers the minority categories. 

sessments should be reproducible and defensible rather than presented as opaque model outputs. Accessibility is supported by the human-in-the-loop design. The frame-work pauses at key decision points, allowing users to confirm, revise, or ask questions before the analysis proceeds. This allows non-expert users to retain control without requiring full knowledge of reliability theory, solver implementation, or method-specific assumptions. These interactions occur through the chat-based web interface. Expert users may also benefit because the framework reduces repetitive tasks such as problem encoding, solver ex-ecution, and result reporting. Finally, the use of open-weight models allows the framework to run locally without dependence on closed APIs. This design supports reproducibility, data control, and adoption in engineering settings where external data transfer or proprietary model access may be undesirable. 30 4.2. Domain-specialized method selection via planner-only fine-tuning 

The evaluation results show that method-selection performance is im-proved more effectively by domain-specific fine-tuning than by model scale alone. The fine-tuned Gemma 4 E4B Planner outperforms the larger un-tuned Gemma 4 26B-A4B model, indicating that the closed-set selection of a reliability-method category requires specialized discrimination rather than only broader pretrained knowledge. This result is important because method selection directly affects the reliability estimate. The untuned models tend to over-predict the FORM-based category, even when the prompt provides the decision criteria and worked examples. Such a bias is problematic be-cause FORM is efficient but can be inaccurate for strongly nonlinear limit-state functions or rare-event problems. In these cases, selecting FORM-based methods by default can produce an apparently valid but unreliable estimate. Planner-only fine-tuning reduces this tendency by improving discrimination among the FORM-based, MCS, and Advanced categories. The selective fine-tuning strategy also has practical advantages. Only the Planner is fine-tuned because it performs the most judgment-intensive closed-set decision in the workflow. The remaining agents handle language understanding, structured extraction, code generation, and result interpre-tation using task-specific prompts. This keeps the adaptation cost low: aQLoRA adapter trained on a single 24 GB GPU is sufficient, without full-model retraining or fine-tuning of every agent. The learned method-selection behavior is also configurable. The category boundaries are determined by the expert-defined labeling criterion used to generate the training data, rather than being fixed properties of the model. For example, a more conservative practitioner could require FORM and MCS estimates to agree within 3% rather than the 5% adopted in this study, thereby routing more borderline cases to MCS. Such a change only requires regenerating the labels and retraining the Planner, while leaving the remain-ing agents unchanged. 

4.3. Limitations and future work 

The present framework is limited to component-level structural reliabil-ity analysis. System configurations, such as series and parallel systems, can be represented by combining component limit-state functions using min or 

max , but the framework does not yet include dedicated system-reliability algorithms. Direct simulation remains conceptually valid, but it may be-come computationally expensive when the system failure probability is small. 31 The framework is also currently limited to limit-state functions that can be evaluated directly within the generated code. Problems requiring external numerical models, such as finite-element analysis, are not considered in the present implementation. Coupling the framework with structural analysis solvers such as OpenSeesPy [12] would extend its applicability to more real-istic engineering problems. Several extensions follow from these limitations. First, incorporating efficient system-reliability methods, such as probability bounds and cut-set/path-set formulations [40], would improve tractability for general system configurations. Second, linking the framework with finite-element solvers would allow reliability assessment of problems whose limit states are not available in closed form. Third, accepting multimodal inputs, such as draw-ings or structural models, and expanding the benchmark toward real-world engineering cases would provide a broader test of practical applicability. Fi-nally, increasing the Planner’s training data and expanding the set of se-lectable reliability methods may further improve method-selection accuracy. Another important extension is to ground standards-related information in authoritative documents. In the present framework, the user provides the probabilistic model, including distribution types and parameters, while the target reliability level is handled at the interpretation stage using preset reference values and model judgment. This information is not yet retrieved directly from governing codes. RAG offers a natural way to address this issue. For example, distribution models for loads and material properties could be retrieved from sources such as the JCSS Probabilistic Model Code [41] or the Eurocodes [42]. Similarly, target reliability levels, such as the target β

values associated with EN 1990 reliability classes, could be retrieved from the relevant code documents and used during result interpretation. Because adapting to another code would require updating the retrieval corpus rather than retraining the model, this approach could support project-specific and jurisdiction-specific reliability assessment. RAG has also shown promise in document-based construction-engineering tasks [43]. 

5. Conclusion 

This study presented a multi-agent large language model (LLM) frame-work designed for component-level structural reliability analysis, specifically the estimation and interpretation of the reliability index β and failure proba-bility Pf . The proposed framework enables users to proceed from a natural-32 language problem statement to an interpreted reliability result by coordi-nating specialized agents for problem formulation, method planning, code generation, deterministic execution, and result interpretation. A main fea-ture of the framework is the separation between language-based reasoning and numerical computation: the LLM agents structure the problem, select the analysis category, generate solver code, and explain the result, whereas β

and Pf are computed only through deterministic execution of validated reli-ability solvers. This design reduces the risk of hallucinated numerical results and supports traceability through structured data contracts. The framework is also built on open-weight models and can run locally, avoiding dependence on closed APIs. In addition, the results show that reliability-method selec-tion benefits from domain-specific specialization. By fine-tuning only the Method Planner using QLoRA, the compact Gemma 4 E4B model achieved higher method-category selection accuracy than both its untuned counter-part and a substantially larger untuned model, indicating that the a priori 

selection of reliability-analysis methods is improved more effectively by tar-geted adaptation to the domain-specific decision task than by model scale alone. The framework therefore provides a practical step toward making reliability-based assessment more accessible, reproducible, and interpretable for a broader range of engineering users. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement Jaehwan Jeon : Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Investiga-tion, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft. Chang Hee Lee :Software, Investigation, Validation, Visualization. Taeyong Kim : Concep-tualization, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial inter-ests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Appendix A. Method Planner system prompt 

The complete system prompt of the Method Planner is reproduced below. It states the category-decision criteria used to assign the reference labels 33 (Section 3.1) together with five worked examples; all three configurations compared in Section 3.3 receive this same prompt, and fine-tuning changes only the model weights, not the prompt. 

# Method Planner Agent You pick ** one ** analysis category for a given ‘ ProblemSpec ‘. The three categories map to the practitioner ’ s real decision , which turns on two things : ** how rare is failure ** ( the reliability index β ,equivalently Pf ) , and ** can FORM ’ s single design - point linearization be trusted ?** The runtime cascade then turns the chosen category into a concrete solver . ## Your output Return a JSON object matching ‘ AnalysisPlan ‘: ‘‘‘ json { " recommended_category ": " FORM - based " | " MCS " | " Advanced " }‘‘‘ You are a ** pure classifier **: emit ONLY the category –- no reasoning , no confidence field ( the user - facing " why " is generated downstream ) . Pick exactly one ; your answer is scored by exact match to the gold category . ## The decision –- apply in THIS order **1. Is failure RARE ? β > 3.5 ( Pf ≲ 2 · 10 − 4 ) ⇒ ‘ Advanced ‘.** Members : CE , iCE , SIS , SuS , CLS . In the rare - event regime plain MCS is infeasible (~10 6 + samples to converge ) and FORM cannot be trusted as the sole answer , so route to advanced sampling . ** Rarity is THE trigger for Advanced , and it OVERRIDES everything below ** –- a strongly curved or multimodal problem that is ALSO rare is ‘ Advanced ‘ , not ‘MCS ‘. **2. Otherwise (β ≤ 3.5 , non - rare ) –- is FORM accurate ? ⇒ ‘FORM - based ‘.** 

34 Members : FORM , SORM , IS . Recommend FORM - based when the limit state is linear or only mildly nonlinear , the failure region sits near a single design point , and FORM ’ s linearization would land within a few % of the true (MCS ) β . This is the common , easy case . **3. Otherwise (β ≤ 3.5 but FORM is UNRELIABLE ) ⇒ ‘MCS ‘.** Member : MCS . When failure is NOT rare but the surface is strongly curved or multimodal so a single linearization is wrong , you do not need a rare - event method –- just sample directly with MCS for the unbiased reference . ** This is the case the rule exists for : FORM - breaking structure + non - rare = ‘MCS ‘ , NOT ‘ Advanced ‘.** ( Curvature alone does not make a problem Advanced ; rarity does .) ## What breaks FORM ( this is what separates 2 → 3 , i . e . FORM -based vs MCS ) FORM linearizes at one design point . It is INACCURATE when the failure surface is curved or has more than one relevant region . Treat these as FORM - breaking (⇒ MCS when non - rare , ⇒ Advanced when rare ) : - two - sided / band / ‘ abs (...) ‘ limit states ( failure on both sides ) –- bimodal - ‘ min (...) ‘ / ‘ max (...) ‘ of competing failure modes –- kinked surface - a denominator that blows up near a pole : resonance ‘1/((1 −r 

> 2

)... ) ‘, P -∆

‘M /(1 −P / Pcr ) ‘, cable sag , eccentric footing ‘Q /( B −2 e ) 2 ‘- oscillatory ‘sin ‘ / ‘cos ‘ terms –- multiple failure lobes - ‘√‘ of a quadratic form / vector magnitude ‘√( x 2 + y 2 ) ‘ interaction surfaces - products or strong curvature where the design point is not representative NOT FORM - breaking –- these stay ‘ FORM - based ‘ when mild and non - rare : a single monotonic power , a single product , a mild ratio . FORM finds the design point 

35 fine ; a monotonic transform does not fool it . ## Examples ### Example 1 –- linear , non - rare → FORM - based 2 normal RVs (R , S ) , LSF " R - S " , β ≈ 2. ‘‘‘ json { " recommended_category ": " FORM - based " }‘‘‘ ### Example 2 –- curved but NON - rare → MCS 3 RVs , √- curvature term ‘c ·√(1 + 0.4 · ( s − 20) 2 ) − s ‘ , β ≈ 2.8 ( Pf ~5 · 10 − 3 ) . FORM mis - linearizes the curvature , but failure is common –-sample directly . ‘‘‘ json { " recommended_category ": " MCS " }‘‘‘ ### Example 3 –- high - dimensional rare event → Advanced 30 RVs , parallel - system LSF , β > 4.5 ( Pf ~10 − 6 ) . MCS infeasible . ‘‘‘ json { " recommended_category ": " Advanced " }‘‘‘ ### Example 4 –- curved AND rare → Advanced ( rarity overrides curvature ) ‘ min () ‘ of two member margins with a wide reserve , β ≈ 4.0. The ‘ min () ‘ would break FORM , but because failure is rare the answer is Advanced , not MCS . ‘‘‘ json { " recommended_category ": " Advanced " }‘‘‘ ### Example 5 –- two - sided / bimodal , non - rare → MCS ‘ tol − abs ( x1 − x2 ) ‘ ( fails if the offset is too large in EITHER direction ) , 

β ≈ 1.6. Two - sided failure breaks FORM ; not rare ⇒ MCS . ‘‘‘ json { " recommended_category ": " MCS " }‘‘‘ 

36 Data availability 

The source code, fine-tuned model weights, and benchmark problems will be made publicly available on GitHub upon acceptance. 

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the Yonsei University Research Fund of 2026-22-0244. 

References 

[1] A. Der Kiureghian, Structural and system reliability, Cambridge Uni-versity Press, 2022. [2] B. R. Ellingwood, T. V. Galambos, J. G. MacGregor, Development of a probability based load criterion for American National Standard A58: Building code requirements for minimum design loads in buildings and other structures, volume 577, US Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, 1980. [3] A. M. Hasofer, N. C. Lind, Exact and invariant second-moment code format, Journal of the Engineering Mechanics Division 100 (1974) 111– 121. [4] R. Rackwitz, B. Fiessler, Structural reliability under combined random load sequences, Computers & Structures 9 (1978) 489–494. [5] S. K. Au, J. L. Beck, Estimation of small failure probabilities in high dimensions by subset simulation, Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics 16 (2001) 263–277. [6] S. Geyer, I. Papaioannou, D. Straub, Cross entropy-based importance sampling using gaussian densities revisited, Structural Safety 76 (2019) 15–27. doi: 10.1016/j.strusafe.2018.07.001 .[7] I. Papaioannou, C. Papadimitriou, D. Straub, Sequential importance sampling for structural reliability analysis, Structural Safety 62 (2016) 66–75. doi: 10.1016/j.strusafe.2016.06.002 .37 [8] I. Papaioannou, D. Straub, Combination line sampling for structural reliability analysis, Structural Safety 88 (2021) 102025. doi: 10.1016/j. strusafe.2020.102025 .[9] P.-R. Wagner, S. Marelli, I. Papaioannou, D. Straub, B. Sudret, Rare event estimation using stochastic spectral embedding, Structural Safety 96 (2022) 102179. doi: 10.1016/j.strusafe.2021.102179 .[10] J.-M. Bourinet, et al., FERUM 4.1: Finite Element Reliability Using MATLAB, 2010. Software, IFMA, France. [11] E. R. A. Group, ERA: Software for reliability and risk analysis, https: //www.cee.ed.tum.de/era/software/ , 2024. Technical University of Munich. [12] M. Zhu, F. McKenna, M. H. Scott, Openseespy: Python library for the opensees finite element framework, SoftwareX 7 (2018) 6–11. [13] H. Liang, M. Talebi Kalaleh, Q. Mei, Integrating large language mod-els for automated structural analysis, arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09754 (2025). [14] J. Liu, Z. Geng, R. Cao, L. Cheng, P. Bocchini, M. Cheng, A large lan-guage model-empowered agent for reliable and robust structural analy-sis, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02938 (2025). [15] X. Zhang, L. Iturburu, J. N. Villamizar, X. Liu, M. Salmeron, S. J. Dyke, J. Ramirez, Large language model agent for structural drawing generation using ReAct prompt engineering and retrieval augmented generation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.19771 (2025). [16] D. Kim, T. Kim, Y. Kim, Y.-H. Byun, T. S. Yun, A ChatGPT-MATLAB framework for numerical modeling in geotechnical engineer-ing applications, Computers and Geotechnics 169 (2024) 106237. doi: 10.1016/j.compgeo.2024.106237 .[17] T. Kim, T. S. Yun, H. S. Suh, Can ChatGPT implement finite element models for geotechnical engineering applications?, International Journal for Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics 49 (2025) 1747– 1766. doi: 10.1002/nag.3956 .38 [18] Z. Geng, J. Liu, R. Cao, L. Cheng, D. M. Frangopol, M. Cheng, A novel multi-agent architecture to reduce hallucinations of large language mod-els in multi-step structural modeling, arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.07728 (2026). [19] S. Youwai, D. Phim, V. G. Murcia, R. C. Onas, Large language model-based multi-agent systems for automated foundation design: router-driven task classification and expert selection framework, AI in Civil Engineering 5 (2026). doi: 10.1007/s43503-026-00088-8 .[20] J. Chen, Y. Bao, Multi-agent large language model framework for code-compliant automated design of reinforced concrete structures, Automa-tion in Construction 177 (2025) 106331. doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2025. 106331 .[21] Y. Dong, Z. Zhan, Y. Hu, D. M. Doe, Z. Han, AI BIM coordinator for non-expert interaction in building design using LLM-driven multi-agent systems, Automation in Construction 180 (2025) 106563. doi: 10.1016/ j.autcon.2025.106563 .[22] H. Liang, Y. Zhou, M. Talebi-Kalaleh, Q. Mei, Automating structural engineering workflows with large language model agents, arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11004 (2025). MASSE. [23] Z. Geng, J. Liu, R. Cao, L. Cheng, H. Wang, M. Cheng, A lightweight large language model-based multi-agent system for 2D frame structural analysis, arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05414 (2025). [24] Z. Geng, I. Franklin, S. Martinez, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, M. Cheng, Agentic large language models for automated structural analysis of 3D frame systems, arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.06525 (2026). [25] H.-R. Xu, N. Zhang, Z.-Y. Yin, P. G. Atangana Njock, Multimodal framework integrating multiple large language model agents for intel-ligent geotechnical design, Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106257. doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2025.106257 .[26] L. Wang, J. Yan, J. Yan, Y. Liu, Towards intelligent safety assess-ment under blast loading: A large language model-powered multi-agent framework, Reliability Engineering & System Safety 272 (2026) 112560. doi: 10.1016/j.ress.2026.112560 .39 [27] J. W. L. Shi, W. Solihin, J. K. W. Yeoh, Fine-tuning a large language model for automated code compliance of building regulations, Advanced Engineering Informatics 68 (2025) 103676. doi: 10.1016/j.aei.2025. 103676 .[28] G. Jiang, J. Chen, Efficient fine-tuning of large language models for automated building energy modeling in complex cases, Automation in Construction 175 (2025) 106223. doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2025.106223 .[29] Z. Dong, Z. Lu, Y. Yang, Fine-tuning a large language model for automating computational fluid dynamics simulations, arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09602 (2025). [30] M. Zhang, C. Xu, Y. Gan, Y. Wang, Y. Fu, Y. Chen, Automating construction contract question answering using large language model and fine-tuning, Expert Systems with Applications 297 (2026) 129493. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2025.129493 .[31] M. Aqib, M. Hamza, Q. Mei, Y. H. Chui, Fine-tuning large language models and evaluating retrieval methods for improved question answer-ing on building codes, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.04666 (2025). [32] T. Dettmers, A. Pagnoni, A. Holtzman, L. Zettlemoyer, Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms, Advances in neural information processing systems 36 (2023) 10088–10115. [33] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, W. Chen, et al., Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models., Iclr 1 (2022) 3. [34] Gemma Team, Gemma 4 technical report, arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.02770 (2026). [35] B. Meyer, Applying “design by contract”, Computer 25 (1992) 40–51. doi: 10.1109/2.161279 .[36] X. Wu, L. Xiao, Y. Sun, J. Zhang, T. Ma, L. He, A survey of human-in-the-loop for machine learning, Future Generation Computer Systems 135 (2022) 364–381. doi: 10.1016/j.future.2022.05.014 .40 [37] I. Loshchilov, F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019. [38] D. Han, M. Han, Unsloth team, Unsloth, https://github.com/ unslothai/unsloth , 2023. [39] Streamlit Inc., Streamlit: A faster way to build and share data apps, 

https://github.com/streamlit/streamlit , 2019. [40] J. Song, W.-H. Kang, Y.-J. Lee, J. Chun, Structural system reliability: Overview of theories and applications to optimization, ASCE-ASME Journal of Risk and Uncertainty in Engineering Systems, Part A: Civil Engineering 7 (2021). doi: 10.1061/AJRUA6.0001122 .[41] Joint Committee on Structural Safety (JCSS), JCSS Probabilistic Model Code, https://www.jcss-lc.org/ jcss-probabilistic-model-code/ , 2001. ISBN 978-3-909386-79-6. [42] European Committee for Standardization (CEN), EN 1990:2002 Eu-rocode — Basis of structural design, 2002. Brussels, Belgium. [43] M. Uhm, J. Kim, S. Ahn, H. Jeong, H. Kim, Effectiveness of retrieval augmented generation-based large language models for generating con-struction safety information, Automation in Construction 170 (2025) 105926. doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2024.105926 .41