Title: Improving Natural-Language Combinatorial-Optimization Accuracy in Resource-Constrained Language Models via Formal Abstractions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.18409v1

Published Time: Thu, 20 Aug 2026 00:18:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
## Improving Natural-Language Combinatorial-Optimization Accuracy in Resource-Constrained Language Models via Formal Abstractions 

Shrenil Shaun Sharma 

Independent Researcher San Francisco, CA, USA 

shrenil19+research@gmail.com 

Avi Sharma 

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences University of California, Berkeley 

avi_sharma@berkeley.edu 

Abstract 

Combinatorial scheduling poses a significant challenge for language models, requiring them to identify feasible solutions within exponen-tially large search spaces while satisfying com-plex constraints. This challenge is especially pronounced in resource-constrained settings, where larger language models are impracti-cal and selection is limited to smaller mod-els which often fail to preserve feasibility when scheduling directly from natural lan-guage. To address these limitations, we intro-duce SDDL, a neuro-symbolic framework that translates natural-language scheduling prob-lems into compact, solver-aligned representa-tions of tasks, resources, constraints, and objec-tives, while delegating low-level modeling and search to a deterministic compiler and external solver. On a 300-instance, multi-family subset of scheduling problems, SDDL improves inde-pendently verified feasibility for every resource-constrained model tested. The two strongest SDDL configurations reach 55.3% and 28.3%, up from direct-generation baselines of 23.7% and 1.3% and solver-code baselines of 21.7% and 7.0%, with a 0.0% median optimality gap among feasible schedules. By expressing prob-lem structure rather than generating solutions or solver code, SDDL enables smaller models to approach the strongest evaluated direct- and solver-code configurations, including substan-tially larger frontier models. 

1 Introduction 

Many requests posed to modern language models arrive in ordinary language, including problems whose solutions depend on an underlying mathe-matical structure. In such cases, constraints, objec-tives, and procedures may be specified only implic-itly, requiring the model to infer the mathematical problem being described. For tasks that instan-tiate optimization problems, this inference is not merely semantic: the model must translate a verbal description into a latent search space of possible solutions and evaluate candidates against implicit feasibility and optimality criteria. This challenge is especially pronounced in resource-constrained set-tings, where model selection is limited to language models with substantially fewer parameters than larger available alternatives. Generating a solution requires parsing the task description, tracking in-teracting constraints, reasoning about objectives, and implicitly searching over alternatives within a single autoregressive pass. For smaller models, this process often yields fluent but infeasible solutions. Neuro-symbolic decomposition may mitigate this limitation by separating language understand-ing from downstream computation: the language model produces an executable or formal representa-tion, and an external runtime or solver performs the corresponding computation (Gao et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023). In optimization-specific systems, this formalization may include decision variables, con-straints, and objectives (Ramamonjison et al., 2022; Ahmaditeshnizi et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2025). This approach, however, shifts the bottleneck to transla-tion fidelity. A solver optimizes only the formaliza-tion it receives, so omitted constraints, misdefined variables, or distorted objectives directly under-mine the resulting solution. Combinatorial opti-mization problems expose this weakness particu-larly well, where unlike small decision problems or clue-based logic puzzles, instances must represent objectives, resource capacities, temporal relations, precedence constraints, and disjunctive alternatives at scale. We find that direct solver-code generation by resource-constrained models often fails as a for-malization strategy, producing programs that may be executable and solver-feasible yet unfaithful to the intended problem. To bridge this gap, we in-troduce SDDL (Scheduling Domain Definition Language) , a domain-specific language that nar-rows the translation target from open-ended solver code to a small set of solver-aligned scheduling primitives. Rather than requiring models to emit 1arXiv:2608.18409v1 [cs.AI] 19 Aug 2026 low-level solver code, SDDL provides scheduling-native abstractions for tasks, resources, constraints, alternatives, and objectives, where SDDL programs are deterministically compiled into a solver model for execution by an external solver. Across 13 models we compare direct and generic solver-code generation, and evaluate SDDL across multiple resource-constrained models. SDDL improves in-dependently verified feasibility for every model tested with it, while reducing the median optimality gap among feasible schedules. Its strongest result ranks among the strongest configurations evalu-ated overall, while others improve to several times their baselines, demonstrating the effectiveness of SDDL relative to direct and generic solver-code generation, and enabling smaller models to match stronger configurations. Our contributions are: 1. SDDL (Scheduling Domain Definition Lan-guage) a domain-specific language for ex-ecutable, objective-bearing combinatorial scheduling formulations that improves the fi-delity of resource-constrained LLM formaliza-tion relative to direct solver-code generation. 2. An independently verified evaluation of 

SDDL against generation strategies matched in conceptual scope and solver target. 3. An evaluation showing SDDL enables sub-stantially smaller models to match or closely approach the performance of the strongest direct- and solver-code configura-tions evaluated, including those using substan-tially larger frontier models. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Structured Formal Reasoning 

Empirical evaluations such as PlanBench docu-ment substantial weaknesses in systematic, multi-step planning (Valmeekam et al., 2023), while Kambhampati et al. (2024) argue that LLMs are better incorporated into frameworks that delegate planning to external modules. Performance on constrained-generation tasks also varies substan-tially across model scales, with smaller, resource-constrained models achieving lower constraint-satisfaction rates than larger models, including un-der zero-shot prompting (Yao et al., 2024). This gap may be compounded by restrictive output-format requirements, which have been shown to de-grade performance on reasoning-heavy tasks (Tam et al., 2024). One such formulation arises in combi-natorial scheduling problems, where models must simultaneously recover problem semantics, respect representational conventions, and maintain con-straint fidelity across interdependent decisions and temporal relations. Together, these findings suggest that preserving reasoning capacity during inference may depend on reducing what the model must for-malize and compute, motivating approaches that delegate execution to external tools. 

2.2 Solver-Delegated Constraint Reasoning 

Neuro-symbolic frameworks leverage LLMs to parse unstructured text into executable represen-tations, delegating computation to external run-times to bypass internal arithmetic and logical er-rors (Gao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Logic-LM extends this approach to symbolic inference, translating natural-language problems into formal logic and using solver feedback to iteratively repair invalid representations (Pan et al., 2023). These results indicate that LLMs can benefit from con-structing executable or symbolic representations while delegating deterministic computation and in-ference to external tools. NL4Opt (Ramamonji-son et al., 2022), OptiMUS (Ahmaditeshnizi et al., 2024), and ConstraintLLM (Shi et al., 2025) apply this paradigm to optimization and constraint pro-gramming at different levels of abstraction. How-ever, OptiMUS and ConstraintLLM target highly expressive, general-purpose programming environ-ments, where formalization can require verbose variable declarations, low-level solver API calls, and, often, explicit control flow on top of translat-ing the underlying problem semantics; generality that may come at the cost of reliable generation. 

2.3 Solver-Free Generation and Decoding 

Alternative approaches evaluate LLMs as direct end-to-end combinatorial solvers (Jiang et al., 2026). In such end-to-end generation contexts, evaluation shows that solution quality and feasi-bility degrade as instance size and structural com-plexity increase (Jiang et al., 2026). Separately, structured-decoding approaches constrain the gen-eration process itself: syntax-aware parsing (Yin and Neubig, 2018) and grammar-constrained de-coding (Geng et al., 2023) enforce structural va-lidity at the token level. However, hard format-ting constraints can degrade underlying reasoning performance (Tam et al., 2024), and a syntacti-cally valid representation may still omit a critical 2constraint or transfer an incorrect value. SDDL therefore rejects malformed programs at parse time and verifies emitted schedules against the source instance, ensuring syntactic validity alone is not treated as evidence of correctness. 

2.4 LLMs for Combinatorial Scheduling 

While the paradigms detailed above address gen-eral constraint satisfaction, literature targeting scheduling-native problem structure remains nar-row and fragmented. Existing scheduling applica-tions mimic the solver-free paradigm through super-vised fine-tuning for job-shop domains (Abgaryan et al., 2024). Such approaches collapse problem interpretation and combinatorial search into a sin-gle generation step, making it difficult to attribute errors in an infeasible schedule to faulty constraint translation rather than search failure. Conversely, general-purpose CP systems relevant to schedul-ing (Michailidis et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2025) in-herit the heavy formalization overhead of general solver APIs and are not designed to exploit the re-curring structural patterns (precedences, resource capacities, coverage requirements, penalized soft constraints) that span scheduling families. Clos-est to our setting, Logic.py (Kesseli et al., 2025) formalizes search-based problems through a DSL for constraint solving and is evaluated primarily on logic-grid puzzles. Its evaluated system focuses on finding satisfying assignments, rather than optimiz-ing objectives over feasible schedules. 

2.5 Natural-Language Scheduling Benchmarks 

Scheduling-specific natural-language benchmarks remain limited. Starjob (Abgaryan et al., 2025) pro-vides a large supervised corpus for end-to-end JSSP scheduling, but verbalizes its instances through fixed templates. R-ConstraintBench (Jain and Wet-ter, 2025) evaluates RCPSP feasibility under sys-tematically varied constraints using similarly struc-tured, field-like descriptions. NL ⇒ Schedule (Liao et al., 2026) offers fuller natural-language descriptions through semi-synthetic instances con-structed from real-world materials across four domains. NLCO (Jiang et al., 2026) covers a broader range of combinatorial optimization fam-ilies outside scheduling and only provides mini-mally verbalized instances. As our evaluation em-phasizes formalization, we prioritize using a bench-mark with unambiguous descriptions and canonical source instances, enabling generated schedules to            

> JSSP instance, 10 jobs ×5 machines
> Rules (excerpt). Steps within an item follow the given order; a location processes at most one step at a time; non-preemptive.
> Setup. 10 scenes on 5 crew stations. Each scene is an ordered sequence of steps; each step names a station and a duration.
> Scene Franklin has a 5-step sequence. Step 1 is at the
> North Sound Stage for 12 hours; Step 2 is at the Second Unit Screening Room for 94 hours. . . [+ 9 more scenes]
> Response format: <ItemName> step k: start=<int> , one per line.
> Figure 1: Example scheduling problem rendered in natural-language; model must recover the underlying structure and emit a start time per step.

be verified directly against formal ground truth. SCHEDBench (Sharma and Sharma, 2026) pro-vides the best guarantee for this requirement by construction, where each description is a controlled, constraint-preserving verbalization of a canonical source instance drawn from established schedul-ing literature; providing a definitive formal ground truth and best-known objective for verifying gener-ated schedules. 

3 Methods and DSL Creation 

SDDL’s design is based on an observation that auto-mated formalization tends to break not only in un-derstanding the problem, but in the many decisions required to render that understanding effectively (Shi et al., 2025). SDDL removes the failure-prone modeling decisions otherwise left to the model by naming only recurring scheduling structures for the model to identify, while a deterministic compiler handles their downstream encoding. We articulate first principles underlying this stance, then develop the interface that realizes them and the compilation guarantees it provides. 

3.1 Scheduling Problems 

Scheduling problems require allocating activities to specific time and resource assignments to produce a feasible schedule that satisfies a set of constraints and optimizes an objective. Although they vary widely in form, their constraint structures are drawn from a few recurring relations: precedence between activities, disjunctive resources that process one ac-tivity at a time, cumulative resources that admit concurrency within a capacity, and multiple pos-sible execution modes for each activity. Different problem families combine these differently: job-shop scheduling (JSSP) chains operations by prece-3dence over disjunctive machines, whereas resource-constrained project scheduling (RCPSP) replaces machines with cumulative resources, and its multi-mode extension adds mode selection under non-renewable budgets; all NP-hard, with makespan as the standard objective. Instances are constraint-dense (ex. Fig. 1), so a single omitted or misread relation silently changes the feasible region, mak-ing scheduling a natural and demanding target for studying faithful formalization of natural-language problem statements. 

3.2 Design Principles 

We optimize the language for three properties: ro-bustness, ensuring the modeling surface admits few malformed programs; concision, allowing con-straints to be expressed without solver-specific machinery; and sufficient expressiveness for the intended problem families. We further require bounded expressiveness: rather than exposing a general-purpose language in which the model may introduce arbitrary variables or predicates, SDDL fixes a vocabulary of recurring scheduling con-structs, precedence, disjunctive and cumulative re-sources, alternative execution modes, alongside supported objectives. This helps reduce opportuni-ties for formalization errors, where otherwise, each degree of freedom exposed to the model creates an-other opportunity for errors (variable declarations, domain bounds, etc.) none of which specified by the original problem. By fixing the vocabulary, SDDL transfers these decisions to the compiler, recasting the model’s role from synthesizing con-straints to recognizing pre-constrained scheduling constructs. These properties stem from a deliberate design decision, as fixed grammatical primitives yield a closed surface language, parse-time rejec-tion, and verified compilation. This also improves solver performance, as CP-SAT’s global constraints such as NoOverlap and Cumulative , propagate more strongly than equivalent Boolean decompo-sitions. A free-form encoding may represent a cu-mulative resource correctly yet bury it in logic that the solver cannot recognize. Because SDDL names these constructs directly, the compiler can consis-tently emit the strongest global encoding. This bounded vocabulary both prevents formalization errors and preserves propagation strength. The re-maining principles then cover a closed surface that rejects malformed programs at parse time, hides solver implementation details, and provides com-plete coverage without leaving constructs implicit.                                                       

> program ::= statement ∗
> statement ::= task (id ,props )
> |resource (id ,props )
> |before (id ,id )
> |no_overlap (id )
> |conflict (ids ,group =s)
> |not_at (id ,props )
> |penalize (m,weight =w,props )
> props ::= ϵ|prop (,prop )∗
> ids ::= id (,id )∗
> prop ::= key =value value ::= scalar |[value , . . . ]|{value :value , . . . }
> Figure 2: The SDDL grammar: ∗means “zero or more,”
> ϵthe empty string, and |separates alternatives. The atoms are id , a quoted identifier; key , a property name;
> m, a penalty measure; w, an integer weight; s, a group name; and scalar , a number or string.

3.3 Primitives 

SDDL defines programs which consist of flat se-quences of primitive scheduling constructs, with neither control flow, nor an expression language beyond literal values. Literals include "lists" and "maps", so values such as the modes list and 

demands and consumes maps are specified directly rather than constructed through code. The com-plete grammar is shown in Fig. 2 above. Two of the seven primitives, task and resource ,declare problem objects; four express hard con-straints while penalize defines soft objectives. Constraint hardness is encoded structurally through the choice of primitive: a clause is hard unless it appears as a penalty, so the model never signals sta-tus through weights or phrasing. We selected the seven primitives to maximize coverage while mini-mizing the language surface, adding one only when existing constructs could not represent the required scheduling pattern. Two design choices illustrate this principle: precedence, which is expressed by the binary before primitive, capturing the pairwise finish-to-start ordering commonly used in these problems, avoiding a general temporal operator that the compiler could not otherwise translate uni-formly. Second is shared-membership constraints, such as those between courses in the same curricu-lum, which are expressed using conflict with an optional group label. The compiler uses this la-bel both to prohibit concurrent assignments, and to identify group-level objective terms. The re-maining hard-constraint primitive, not_at , forbids a task from executing during specified absolute times. 4task(id, **props) resource(id, **props) before(a, b) no_overlap(r) conflict(t1, ..., group=) not_at(id, **when) penalize(measure, weight=w, **params) 

As an illustration, the clause “operation A runs on machine m0 ...” formalizes to the below primitives, 

> task("a", machine="m0", duration=3) task("b", machine="m1", duration=2) before("a", "b")

whose lowering schedules the two tasks as intervals on their respective machines, then adds the single constraint start b ≥ end a; with the model stating the operations and ordering, while every solver variable is introduced by the compiler. 

3.4 Property Polymorphism 

To cover varied task structures with a single dec-laration form, SDDL assigns task a property-dependent representation, with each task’s form inferred directly from its properties by the com-piler. A task is continuous if it specifies a duration or modes and no counts. Continuous tasks lower to start, end, and interval variables. This is espe-cially useful for multi-mode activities, where the model supplies a list of duration-and-resource pro-files while the compiler introduces the selection variables, optional intervals, and exactly-one con-straint needed to choose a single mode. A second structure, discrete tasks declared by count, low-ers to day-period-room variables for timetabling families; while specified and compiler-verified, it currently lies outside our evaluated scope. Because well-formed tasks must satisfy exactly one rule, archetype assignment is therefore deterministic, and the model therefore transcribes properties from the problem statement rather than choosing an inter-nal representation. Property polymorphism there-fore keeps the language compact while moving error-prone encoding decisions into the compiler. 

3.5 Resource Semantics 

Resource handling is where the language most clearly justifies its design as it makes explicit a distinction that natural-language descriptions often obscure but solvers must encode differently. A ma-chine serving one job at a time is disjunctive, so assigned intervals cannot overlap. A shared worker pool is cumulative, so tasks may overlap provided total demand does not exceed capacity. Leaving this distinction implicit is a common source of mod-eling errors. The DSL resolves this ambiguity at declaration time. Renewable resources define a ca-pacity referenced through a per-task demands map; their units are occupied during execution and re-leased at completion, so they compile to cumulative constraints. Nonrenewable resources define a total and use a consumes map; their units are perma-nently expended, and compile to a project-wide lin-ear budget. Disjunctive resources use no_overlap .The explicit structure determines the encoding: 

demands indicates cumulative capacity, consumes 

indicates exhaustible supply, and no_overlap indi-cates one-at-a-time use. The model need only clas-sify the resource as capacity-limited, exhaustible, or strictly disjunctive, and the compiler then gen-erates the corresponding constraint and prevents encoding errors. All 3 resource classes are exer-cised in our evaluation. 

3.6 Objectives 

Where hard constraints determine feasibility, 

penalize optimizes quality within the feasible re-gion. Each penalty specifies a measure and weight; the compiler scales and sums the measures into a single minimized objective. Measures are se-lected from a fixed set: completion time, over-capacity, day spread, isolation, and room instabil-ity; rather than defined as free-form cost functions. This restriction provides the same safeguards as the closed constraint language. Arbitrary objec-tives can be syntactically valid yet semantically incorrect because of counting errors or optimiza-tion in the wrong direction. Named measures are implemented once by the compiler and reused con-sistently. The model therefore expresses only the intended preference and its weight, while the com-piler realizes the objective correctly. 

3.7 Compilation 

Compilation is deterministic and requires no fur-ther model input. Programs are parsed through the language’s abstract-syntax machinery accept-ing only literals, so generated text is never exe-cuted, programs do not introduce side effects, and malformed inputs are rejected. Correctness is de-fined by an abstract, solver-independent seman-tics specifying schedules and objective values. A schedule assigns start and end times to continu-ous tasks, including selected durations for multi-mode tasks, and day-period-room tuples to discrete meetings. Each statement defines a feasibility con-dition, while penalize defines a weighted objec-5tive. For example, before(a,b) requires (a) to end before (b) starts, no_overlap forbids simul-taneous resource use, and a renewable resource 

of capacity (k) limits total active demand to (k). The compiler lowers each statement into solver variables, constraints, and an objective. Correct-ness requires the compiled model to preserve both feasibility and objective values. Direct primi-tives map immediately to solver constraints; cu-mulative resources, mode selection, and penalty measures involving reified constraints require ad-ditional equivalence arguments, provided in Ap-pendix A.3. For continuous tasks, the inferred hori-zon is ( H = T + P 

> i

max m∈Mi dim ), where (T) is one plus the latest forbidden time and (M_i) is task (i)’s set of modes. Every feasible instance admits a serial schedule within this horizon; therefore, un-der the evaluated makespan objective, the horizon contains at least one optimal schedule. 

3.8 Guarantees and Robustness 

A closed vocabulary and deterministic compiler provide two guarantees normally unavailable when each instance is independently translated into solver code: every well-formed program compiles to a unique solver model without a new transla-tion for each problem, and adequacy ensures that compilation preserves its meaning. Any feasible solution can be read as a horizon-bounded schedule satisfying the program, and every such schedule corresponds to a feasible solver solution with the same objective value. As the reference semantics and compiled model are constructed statement by statement, adequacy can be proven for each state-ment independently. For well-formed programs, adequacy removes compiler lowering as a source of semantic discrepancy, leaving the model-produced formalization as the remaining source of semantic error. The failure surface is therefore minimized, with every reported schedule tested directly against the source instance by an independent verifier. Ex-tension beyond evaluated families requires no re-design of the language: discrete timetabling reuses the same declaration form through a second task archetype, and family-specific objectives are added by registering named measures in the existing com-piler. 

4 Experimental Evaluation 

We use publicly released benchmark instances, evaluation harness, and verifiers to evaluate SDDL. We include previously reported DIRECT and SOLVER results from SCHEDBench, with newly generated results marked explicitly for contextual comparisons to characterize performance across model capabilities and generation modalities, while SDDL tests DSL-assisted combinatorial optimiza-tion in resource-constrained models. All conditions use fixed, instance-independent zero-shot prompts, greedy decoding (temperature 0), and no worked examples. Transient API failures are retried un-til generation completes, irrespective of solution quality. DIRECT includes only task and format instructions. SOLVER provides an OR-Tools CP-SAT guide covering equivalent scheduling con-cepts, conventions, and solver targets as SDDL; SDDL additionally includes its language specifi-cation due to its absence from pretraining corpora. SOLVER and SDDL therefore share conceptual scope but differ in formalization interface: open-ended solver code versus a closed language with deterministic compilation. Appendix B.3 gives the full inference settings, sandbox configuration, and pinned software and OR-Tools versions. 

4.1 SCHEDBench Evaluation Subset 

We evaluate SDDL on the JSSP, single-mode RCPSP, and multi-mode RCPSP families of SCHEDBench, which dominate standard bench-marks and prior work on LLM scheduling. These families exercise the precedence, disjunctive and cumulative resources, nonrenewable budgets, multi-mode selection, and the objective channels of the DSL, and use a standardized makespan objec-tive penalize , making optimality gap a clean mea-sure of end-to-end feasibility; conflict, not_at, and the discrete archetype are specified and compiler-verified but left unexercised. We exclude families scored through benchmark-specific weighted soft violations, whose instance specific penalty terms could be supported by registering additional named measures in the existing compiler. 

4.2 Evaluation Scoring and Metric Definitions 

Our primary metric is feasibility, where an emitted schedule must satisfy every hard constraint of the canonical source instance, as determined by an in-dependent verifier. The pipeline renders a schedule as a structured listing of integer start times, checked directly against the source instance rather than the solver’s reported status. Violations are classified as precedence, machine-overlap, or resource-capacity errors. For feasible schedules, the verifier recom-6putes the objective from the schedule itself, pre-venting an incorrectly encoded objective from in-flating performance. We then report the gap to the canonical optimum or best-known solution; where 

optimal denotes a feasible schedule with a gap of at most ( 10 −9). Gaps are summarized by the median over feasible runs. Each run receives exactly 1 out-come: feasible , infeasible , no-solution , or run-fail .Failures before verification, including unparseable DSL output, transpilation errors, rendering fail-ures, solver-reported infeasibility, and timeouts; are recorded as no-solution or run-fail . Feasibility therefore evaluates the complete path from natural-language input to verified schedule, not just the solver’s assessment of its own model. We report 95% Wilson CIs for feasibility rates. The DSL is parsed using a literal-only parser, never executed directly. 

4.3 Constraint Solving via SAT-Based Solvers 

Constraint programming (CP) represents a com-binatorial problem using finite-domain decision variables and constraints over joint assignments. Search is interleaved with propagation, which re-duces variable domains until a solution is found, infeasibility is proved, or an objective bound is certified. Modern SAT-based solvers implement this through lazy clause generation: propagators express their inferences as clauses for a conflict-driven SAT engine, combining CP propagation with SAT clause learning and linear relaxations for objective bounds. We target CP-SAT, the SAT-based constraint solver in Google OR-Tools. For scheduling, it provides interval variables link-ing a task’s start, duration, and end, with global constraints such as NoOverlap for disjunctive re-sources and Cumulative for shared-capacity re-sources. Their dedicated propagation methods, in-cluding overload checking, edge-finding, and ener-getic reasoning, prune more effectively than pair-wise Boolean decompositions. CP-SAT also sup-ports reified linear constraints and AllDifferent 

for assignment problems. Given an integer objec-tive, CP-SAT proves optimality, returns the best so-lution found within the time limit, or proves infea-sibility. Our compiler targets this interface directly, so SDDL primitives map to the solver constructs with the strongest relevant propagation. 

5 Results and Discussion 

We compare overall feasibility across direct natural-language scheduling (D IRECT ), solver-assisted scheduling (S OLVER ), and SDDL-assisted con-figuration (SDDL) for 13 models on the same 300-instance set. The main table and discussion focus on the two strongest resource-constrained SDDL models, while Appendix C reports addi-tional SDDL results for a broader set of resource-constrained models, all of which show similar feasibility improvements. Pairwise feasibility is tested using two-sided McNemar tests on paired instance-level outcomes, with Holm correction ap-plied jointly across pairwise comparisons. Under DIRECT , GPT-5.5 obtains the highest feasibility at 57.0%. Solver-assisted performance is strongly model-dependent: 10 of 13 models improve and 3 decline, with changes ranging from −10 .0% to 

+52 .0% points. Against this baseline, Qwen 3.5 27B with SDDL reaches 55.3% feasibility, while Devstral Small 2 24B with SDDL reaches 28.3% feasibility, both substantially improved over Direct. 

5.1 Effect on Resource-Constrained Models 

With SDDL, Qwen3.5-27B reaches 55.3% fea-sibility, up significantly from 23.7% under D I- 

> RECT

generation, while Devstral-Small-2-24B similarly improves from 1.3% to 28.3%. For Qwen3.5-27B, generic S OLVER assistance yields only 21.7% feasibility, slightly below D IRECT ,whereas SDDL delivers gains of 31.7 and 33.7 per-centage points over the two conditions, respectively (p < 10 −22 ). 1 As both solver-mediated conditions share solver and conceptual scope, these results indicate that solver access alone is insufficient, and supports SDDL’s constrained formalization-and-compilation approach. Run-failure rate also falls from 62.7% under S OLVER to 16.0% with SDDL (a 46.7-point reduction), indicating that the feasibility gain coincides with a increase in solve reliability. Devstral-Small-2-24B benefits similarly from SDDL, with feasibility reaching 28.3%, vs. 7.0% with SOLVER and 1.3% under DIRECT ( p < 10 −15 ), while run-failure falls from 66.7% to 30.0%. 

5.2 Performance Positioning of SDDL 

We position Qwen 3.5 27B with SDDL against the strongest results in Table 1. The highest di-

> 1SDDL discordant gains/losses: 100/5 and 107/6 (Qwen vs. DIRECT and SOLVER); 82/1 and 67/3 (Devstral).

7Solver-Mediated Generation Direct Generation Model N

Feas. 

(%) 

95% CI 

(%) 

R. fail 

(%) 

Med. gap 

(%) N

Feas. 

(%) 

95% CI 

(%) 

Med. gap 

(%) ∆ Feas. 

claude-opus-4-6 300 56.7 ‡ [51.0, 62.2] 21.0 0.0 300 4.7 [2.8, 7.7] 18.3 +52.0 qwen3.5-27b + SDDL † 300 55.3 ‡ [49.7, 60.9] 16.0 0.0 300 23.7 [19.2, 28.8] 395.8 +31.7 

gpt-5.5 (2026-04-23) 300 53.3 ‡ [47.7, 58.9] 5.0 0.0 300 57.0 [51.3, 62.5] 36.7 −3.7 gpt-5.4 (2026-03-05) 300 51.7 [46.0, 57.3] 18.3 0.0 300 0.3 [0.1, 1.9] 16.7 +51.3 

gpt-5.4-mini (2026-03-17) 300 36.7 [31.4, 42.3] 32.3 7.5 300 0.7 [0.2, 2.4] 131.8 +36.0 

claude-sonnet-4-6 300 35.0 ‡ [29.8, 40.6] 24.3 0.0 300 8.3 [5.7, 12.0] 19.5 +26.7 qwen/qwen3.5-397b (2026-02-16) 300 33.3 [28.2, 38.8] 12.3 0.0 300 19.3 [15.3, 24.2] 14.6 +14.0 

devstral-small-2-24b + SDDL † 300 28.3 ‡ [23.5, 33.7] 30.0 0.0 300 1.3 ‡ [0.5, 3.4] 111.2 +27.0 qwen/qwen3.5-122b (2026-02-24) 300 23.3 [18.9, 28.4] 56.0 0.6 300 7.0 [4.6, 10.5] 7.1 +16.3 qwen/qwen3.5-27b (2026-02-24) 300 21.7 [17.4, 26.7] 62.7 2.6 300 23.7 [19.2, 28.8] 395.8 −2.0 gemini-3.1-flash-lite 300 17.0 [13.2, 21.7] 56.7 0.0 300 0.3 [0.1, 1.9] 107.1 +16.7 gemini-3-flash-preview 300 12.0 ‡ [8.8, 16.2] 74.3 0.0 300 22.0 [17.7, 27.0] 24.5 −10.0 

devstral-small-2-24b (2025-12-09) 300 7.0 ‡ [4.6, 10.5] 66.7 0.0 300 1.3 ‡ [0.5, 3.4] 111.2 +5.7 claude-haiku-4-5 (2025-10-01) 300 2.0 [0.9, 4.3] 37.0 0.0 300 1.0 [0.3, 2.9] 135.3 +1.0 meta-llama-4-maverick-17bX123e 300 1.0 [0.3, 2.9] 92.0 0.0 300 0.3 [0.1, 1.9] 150.0 +0.7 

Table 1: Per-model results on SCHEDBench subset, ‡ marks new results. Brackets list 95% Wilson CIs on feasibility. Bold figures follow model feasibility through all three conditions, direct → solver-mediated → SDDL, with blue for qwen3.5-27b, orange for devstral-small-2-24b. †Evaluated with SDDL, not a new model. 

rect result is 57.0% feasibility on the 300 instance SCHEDBench subset, obtained by GPT-5.5, while the highest solver-assisted result is 56.7%, obtained by Claude Opus 4.6. Qwen 3.5 27B with SDDL reaches 55.3%, compared with the generic solver-assisted results of GPT-5.5 (53.3%) and GPT-5.4 (51.7%), and within 1.4 and 1.7 points of the strongest solver-assisted (Claude Opus 4.6, 56.7%) and direct (GPT-5.5, 57.0%) configurations. SDDL closes 94.9% of Qwen’s deficit to GPT-5.5 under DIRECT (33.3 → 1.7 %) and 96.0% of its deficit to the strongest solver-assisted configuration (35.0 →

1.4 %). The resulting configuration ranks among the highest feasibility overall and exceeds every generic solver-assisted configuration except Claude Opus 4.6 without increasing the capacity of the 27B model. These findings position our approach as a promising means of improving performance across resource-constrained models; with potential applicability to other resource-constrained settings. 

5.3 Optimality of Feasible Schedules 

Feasibility establishes whether a schedule satisfies the problem’s constraints, but not its quality. Thus, we report the median optimality gap among feasi-ble outputs—the difference between a schedule’s objective value and the best-known value for its instance, where 0.0% indicates that the schedule matches the best-known objective. Across all four resource-constrained models evaluated with SDDL, the median gap is 0.0%, while feasibility ranges from 15.0% to 55.3%. This represents broader fea-sible coverage than direct generation, whose me-dian gaps range from 111.2% to 395.8%, and than generic solver-code generation, which generally obtains low median gaps but solves considerably fewer instances. Qwen3.5-27B with SDDL reaches 55.3% feasibility with a 0.0% median gap, com-pared with 23.7% feasibility and a 395.8% median gap under D IRECT , and 21.7% feasibility and a 2.6% median gap under S OLVER . Since gaps are computed only over feasible outputs, the median for each condition may reflect a different subset of instances, and should be interpreted alongside feasibility. Still, the consistent 0.0% median gap across SDDL configurations indicates its advantage may extend to objective quality beyond validity. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduced SDDL, a scheduling-specific lan-guage that lets models express problem structure through compact, solver-aligned primitives while delegating low-level modeling and search to a com-piler and solver. On 300 SCHEDBench instances spanning multiple scheduling families, SDDL sub-stantially raises feasibility, showing that a DSL can serve as an intermediate representation enabling resource-constrained models to match or close the deficit to the strongest evaluated configurations. 

Limitations 

We do not evaluate SDDL on frontier-scale mod-els, as our focus lies on seeking methods that im-8prove performance for resource-constrained ap-plications where the use of frontier scale sized models may not be possible. SDDL may also improve frontier models however is left as nat-ural future work. Although SDDL’s primitives are designed to cover a wide variety of schedul-ing problems, its generalization to combinatorial domains beyond scheduling remains empirically untested, and represents a natural direction for future work. Our evaluation also only covers JSSP/SM-RCPSP/MM-RCPSP scheduling fami-lies, with discrete formulations and their respec-tive measures specified, compiler-verified, but with evaluation of their LLM-translation left to future work. Our evaluation measures single-pass, zero-shot formalization under greedy decoding. We do not evaluate iterative repair or self-correction which may recover execution failures at additional inference cost. Because models are accessed via provider APIs, temperature-0 decoding is not bit-wise deterministic, and each instance is evaluated as a single draw with uncertainty quantified across instances rather than sampling seed. Our use of resource-constrained concerns only the parameter count of the language-model component and does not imply lower end-to-end compute, latency, mem-ory, or cost for the full solver-assisted pipeline. Based on preliminary pilot experiments, we re-strict our evaluation to models with approximately 20B or more parameters. Models below this range produced substantially lower rates of valid formal-izations (feas. < 5%), making a full evaluation pro-hibitively uninformative under our fixed zero-shot setting. This threshold was selected empirically; therefore, our conclusions are limited to the evalu-ated model-size range and should not be interpreted as establishing a general minimum model size for SDDL. 

References 

Henrik Abgaryan, Tristan Cazenave, and Ararat Haru-tyunyan. 2025. Starjob: Dataset for LLM-driven job shop scheduling. arXiv , arXiv:2503.01877. Henrik Abgaryan, Ararat Harutyunyan, and Tristan Cazenave. 2024. LLMs can schedule. Preprint ,arXiv:2408.06993. Ali Ahmaditeshnizi, Wenzhi Gao, and Madeleine Udell. 2024. OptiMUS: Scalable optimization modeling with (MI)LP solvers and large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 577–596. PMLR. Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. 2023. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from reason-ing for numerical reasoning tasks. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Gra-ham Neubig. 2023. PAL: Program-aided language models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 10764–10799. PMLR. Saibo Geng, Martin Josifoski, Maxime Peyrard, and Robert West. 2023. Grammar-constrained decoding for structured NLP tasks without finetuning. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10932– 10952, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Raj Jain and Marc Wetter. 2025. R-ConstraintBench: Evaluating LLMs on NP-complete scheduling. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.15204. Xia Jiang, Jing Chen, Cong Zhang, Jie Gao, Cheng-peng Hu, Chenhao Zhang, Yaoxin Wu, and Yingqian Zhang. 2026. Reasoning in a combinatorial and constrained world: Benchmarking LLMs on natural-language combinatorial optimization. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 30592–30648, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, Mudit Verma, Kaya Stechly, Siddhant Bham-bri, Lucas Paul Saldyt, and Anil B. Murthy. 2024. Position: LLMs can’t plan, but can help planning in LLM-modulo frameworks. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 22895–22907. PMLR. Pascal Kesseli, Peter O’Hearn, and Ricardo S. Cabral. 2025. Logic.py: Bridging the gap between LLMs and constraint solvers. In Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , volume 38. Curran Associates, Inc. Wenrui Liao, Weihong Du, Yi Li, Hongru Liang, and Wenqiang Lei. 2026. NL → schedule: Evaluate mul-titask scheduling capability of large language models. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 35620–35640, San Diego, Cali-fornia, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kostis Michailidis, Dimos Tsouros, and Tias Guns. 2024. Constraint modelling with LLMs using in-context learning. In 30th International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Program-ming (CP 2024) , volume 307 of Leibniz Interna-tional Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) , pages 

920:1–20:27, Dagstuhl, Germany. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Wang. 2023. Logic-LM: Empowering large language models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 3806–3824, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Rindranirina Ramamonjison, Timothy Yu, Raymond Li, Haley Li, Giuseppe Carenini, Bissan Ghaddar, Shiqi He, Mahdi Mostajabdaveh, Amin Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Zirui Zhou, and Yong Zhang. 2022. NL4Opt competition: Formulating optimization problems based on their natural language descrip-tions. In Proceedings of the NeurIPS 2022 Competi-tions Track , volume 220 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 189–203. PMLR. Shrenil Shaun Sharma and Avi Sharma. 2026. SCHED-Bench: A benchmark for evaluating LLM con-straint faithfulness in natural-language combinatorial scheduling. arXiv , arXiv:2608.00991. Weichun Shi, Minghao Liu, Wanting Zhang, Langchen Shi, Fuqi Jia, Feifei Ma, and Jian Zhang. 2025. ConstraintLLM: A neuro-symbolic framework for industrial-level constraint programming. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 15999–16019, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Zhi Rui Tam, Cheng-Kuang Wu, Yi-Lin Tsai, Chieh-Yen Lin, Hung yi Lee, and Yun-Nung Chen. 2024. Let me speak freely? A study on the impact of format restrictions on large language model performance. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 1218–1236, Miami, Florida, US. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. 2023. PlanBench: An extensible benchmark for eval-uating large language models on planning and reason-ing about change. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 38975–38987. Curran Associates, Inc. Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, Austin W. Hanjie, Runzhe Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. COLLIE: Sys-tematic construction of constrained text generation tasks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Pengcheng Yin and Graham Neubig. 2018. TRANX: A transition-based neural abstract syntax parser for semantic parsing and code generation. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstra-tions , pages 7–12, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

A SDDL Semantics and Compilation 

A.1 Primitive and Property Reference 

Table 5 lists every primitive, accepted property, and well-formedness requirement; Table 2 defines the five registered penalty measures.                

> Measure Archetype Definition (minimized)
> makespan continuous max iend iover all scheduled tasks
> capacity discrete total enrolment exceeding room ca-pacity, summed over assignments
> spread discrete shortfall below each task’s min_days
> distinct meeting days
> isolated discrete count of meetings with no adjacent same-group meeting
> room_stability discrete number of distinct rooms used by a task beyond the first

Table 2: The five registered penalty measures. Each is implemented once in the compiler and reused across programs; makespan is the only measure exercised by the evaluated families. 

A.2 Compiler-Lowering Summary 

Table 6 maps each SDDL construct to the CP-SAT encoding the compiler emits; all solver variables are introduced by the compiler. 

A.3 Correctness Arguments 

Adequacy is proven statement-by-statement; the constructs whose lowerings introduce auxiliary variables require the following arguments: • Cumulative resources. AddCumulative en-forces P  

> i:si≤t<e i

dir ≤ k at every t, the reference condition. Multi-mode tasks con-tribute one optional interval per mode, present iff its mode Boolean holds; AddExactlyOne 

presents exactly the selected mode’s interval and demand, so solutions correspond one-to-one with reference schedules. • Mode selection. AddExactlyOne (bi·) makes selection total and unique; channelling bim ⇒

di = dim fixes the master interval’s dura-tion, per-mode optional intervals share the task’s start, and nonrenewable consumption P 

> m

cimr bim equals the selected mode’s con-sumption. Starts, durations, consumptions are preserved in both directions. • Reified penalty measures. Every mea-sure lowers to variables constrained to equal 

the measured quantity ( AddMaxEquality for makespan; complementary OnlyEnforceIf 

pairs, b ⇔ condition, for discrete counts), never one-sided bounds a minimizer could 10 exploit; compiled objectives therefore equal reference objectives on all feasible schedules. • Horizon soundness. With H = T +P 

> i

max m∈Mi dim (T = one plus the latest forbidden time; zero for the evaluated fam-ilies), the serial schedule in topological order is feasible with span ≤ H, so truncation to 

[0 , H ] never empties the feasible set. The un-restricted optimum is at most the serial span 

≤ H, and any schedule attaining it has ev-ery end within [0 , H ]; the compiled optimum equals the reference optimum. • Composition. Lowerings share only the task variables (si, d i, e i, b im ) whose meaning the items above fix, so per-statement adequacy composes to program adequacy; the residual failure surface is the model-produced formal-ization, measured by the independent verifier (B.4). 

A.4 Worked Translation Example 

Figure 3 shows one complete translation. CP-SAT returns the optimum, makespan 7 (welding: 

j0_o0 [0 , 3) , j1_o1 [4 , 7) ; grinding: j1_o0 [0 , 4) ,

j0_o1 [4 , 6) ; the lower bound from Batch Con-cord’s 4+3 chain), rendered back to schedule lines via label /position .

A.5 Full SDDL, Transpiler, Compiler 

• literal-only ast -based parser ( ∼170 lines; generated text is never executed); • CP-SAT transpiler (∼560 lines; both archetypes, all five measures); • renderer mapping solved variables to schedule lines via task labels; • evaluation harness, per-instance outputs, and scoring records. 

B Experimental Details 

B.1 SCHEDBench Evaluation Subset 

Instances chosen randomly using a fixed sub-sampling seed 42; instance identifiers are the 

source_instance fields of the benchmark. Gaps are computed against canonical optimum or best-known solution; and breakdown of per family sub-set composition is below. 

B.2 Prompt Templates 

Figures 4 and 5 reproduce the three fixed, instance-independent system prompts; the user message is         

> Family Source suites N
> JSSP Taillard, DMU, LA, ORB, ABZ, SWV 100 SM-RCPSP PSPLIB J30–J120 100 MM-RCPSP PSPLIB MM J10–J30 100

Table 3: Evaluation-subset composition. 

the instance’s problem text plus its response-format section, identical across tested conditions. All con-ditions are evaluated zero-shot, without worked examples. 

B.2.1 Direct Generation 

Figure 4 reproduces the D IRECT system prompt. 

B.2.2 Generic Solver-Code Generation 

Figure 5 reproduces the S OLVER system prompt. 

B.2.3 SDDL Generation 

The SDDL system prompt is reproduced beginning on p. 17. 

B.3 Model, Inference, and Solver Configuration        

> Setting Value
> Resource-Constrained models qwen3.5-27b (2026-02-24), devstral-small-2-24b (2025-12-09), qwen3-coder-30b-a3b (2025-07-31), magistral-small-24b (2025-09-17) Reproduced pinned versions of Table 1 (SCHEDBench) Decoding greedy (temperature 0), zero-shot, single pass, no tools Max output tokens 96,000 default; provider ceilings; token-terminated responses retained and scored Sandbox no network, fresh directory, 4 GB memory, 300 s wall-clock limit; CP-SAT budget fixed at 240 s in both solver-mediated conditions Software Python 3.11.2; OR-Tools 9.15.6755 (CP-SAT, de-fault parameters except max_time_in_seconds )

Table 4: Inference, sandbox, and solver configuration. 

B.4 Verification and Outcome Accounting 

The verifier parses emitted schedule lines and re-derives feasibility and the objective directly from the canonical source instance; it shares no code with the DSL parser, transpiler, or CP-SAT, and is the same component that scores D IRECT (whose pipeline involves no compiler). Solver status is never trusted. • Run-fail : no scoreable schedule (un-parseable/empty output, parse rejection, tran-spile or runtime error, sandbox timeout, or no completed generation). • No-solution : program executed; solver re-ported infeasibility or returned nothing within budget. 11 • Infeasible : schedule produced but violates a hard constraint (classified precedence / machine-overlap / resource-capacity, plus cov-erage for missing activities). • Feasible : all hard constraints verified; objec-tive recomputed from the schedule. • DIRECT accounting : unparseable → run-fail; parsed-but-violating → infeasible; no-solution cannot occur. • Denominator : N =300 per configuration; in-stances without a completed generation count as run-fail, so each row’s outcomes sum to 100%. • Wilson 95% CI :  ˆp + z2 

> 2n

±

z

q ˆp(1 −ˆp) 

> n

+ z2

> 4n2

  1 + z2

> n

, z = 1 .96 .• Paired tests : two-sided exact McNe-mar on instance-level feasibility, p =min  1, 2 P

> i≤min( b,c )

 ni

2−n, n = b + c;Holm correction applied jointly across all re-ported pairwise comparisons; unscored in-stances count as not-feasible on both sides (no verdict changes on the jointly-scored subset). Table 7 lists all discordant counts. 

C Supplemental Results 

C.1 Error Analysis 

Representative exemplars (one per dominant code): • Dropped edge : all 32 tasks, 4 resources, and every duration/demand of a 30-activity MM-RCPSP instance transcribed correctly; two 

before() entries omitted. • Conflation : instance contains both “Waste Removal Planning” and “North Waste Re-moval Planning”; the program declares only 

north_waste_removal_planning yet writes 

before("waste_removal_planning", ...) → KeyError .• Derailment : correct DSL for 160 lines, then drift into natural-language commentary; re-jected at parse time. • Duplicate declarations : a job-shop program emits its 300 operation declarations twice (600 task() calls), leaving edge semantics at-tached to shadowed duplicates. 12 Primitive Property Value Meaning / well-formedness 

task(id, ...) duration int ≥ 0 processing time; declares a continuous task 

modes list of maps alternative execution modes, each a map with duration and optional 

demands /consumes ; declares a continuous multi-mode task; mutually exclusive with a top-level duration demands map {rid: int }

renewable units held while active; keys must name declared resource() 

ids with capacity consumes map {rid: int }

nonrenewable units expended once; keys must name resources with 

total machine string rid fixed disjunctive-resource assignment; pair with no_overlap(rid) job ,

position 

int, int job index and 0-based operation index (job-shop bookkeeping used by the renderer) 

label string verbatim display name from the problem text; consumed by the render-er/verifier, not the solver 

count int ≥ 1 number of meetings; declares a discrete (timetabling) task 

min_days ,

students 

int discrete-archetype spread/enrolment attributes 

demand int ≥ 1 units required while assigned (discrete archetype: enrolment, checked against room capacity and scored by the capacity measure) 

resource(id, ...) capacity int ≥ 1 renewable per-time capacity ⇒ cumulative semantics; for the discrete archetype, a room’s seat capacity 

total int ≥ 1 nonrenewable project-wide budget ⇒ linear budget semantics (neither) — strictly disjunctive resource; meaningful with no_overlap before(a, b) — task ids hard finish-to-start precedence: end a ≤ start b; both ids must be de-clared 

no_overlap(r) — resource id at most one assigned task active on r at any time 

conflict(...) group string (opt.) listed tasks may not occupy the same time slot; group label also keys group-level objective terms (discrete archetype) 

not_at(id, ...) day ,

period 

int forbids execution at the given absolute time; on continuous tasks the forbidden times enter the horizon offset T (§3.7) 

penalize(m, ...) weight int ≥ 1 soft objective term; m must be a registered measure name (Table 2) 

Table 5: Complete primitive and property reference. A well-formed task satisfies exactly one archetype rule: it is continuous iff it specifies duration or modes and no count , and discrete iff it specifies count ; archetype assignment is therefore deterministic and complete, and a task specifying both (or neither) is rejected as malformed. 

SDDL construct CP-SAT lowering 

continuous task (fixed duration d) si, e i ∈ [0 , H ] (NewIntVar ); interval NewIntervalVar (si, d, e i)

continuous task with modes Mi mode Booleans bim (NewBoolVar ) with AddExactlyOne ; duration variable di ∈

[min m dim , max m dim ] channelled by bim ⇒ di = dim (OnlyEnforceIf ); a master interval on (si, d i, e i) plus one NewOptionalFixedSizeIntervalVar (si, d im , b im )

per mode 

before(a, b) model.Add (sb ≥ ea)

no_overlap(r) AddNoOverlap over the intervals of tasks with machine = r

renewable resource ( capacity =

k)

AddCumulative (intervals, demands, k); multi-mode tasks contribute their per-mode 

optional intervals with mode-specific demands nonrenewable resource ( total =

B)linear budget P

> i

P 

> m

cim bim ≤ B (fixed-mode consumption enters as constants) 

conflict(...) AddAllDifferent over the members’ slot variables (discrete archetype) discrete task (count c) c meetings, each with day, period, and room integer variables and channelled slot 

= day · NP + period ; room assignment respects seat capacity 

not_at(id, day, period) continuous tasks: reified exclusion ei ≤ t ∨ si > t per forbidden time t; discrete tasks: slot-exclusion constraints on the day/period variables, reified per meeting 

penalize("makespan", w) ms ∈ [0 , H ] with AddMaxEquality (ms , {ei}); contributes w · ms 

objective Minimize   P penalty terms 

Table 6: Statement-by-statement lowering into CP-SAT. Discrete-archetype tasks lower to day, period, and room integer variables with a channelled slot variable slot = day · NP + period .

13 Natural-language statement. 2 jobs, 2 machines. Job “Batch Northview”: step 1 on Main Welding Station for 3 min, step 2 on West Grinding Station for 2 min. Job “Batch Concord”: step 1 on West Grinding Station for 4 min, step 2 on Main Welding Station for 3 min. 

SDDL program (model output): 

resource("main_welding_station") resource("west_grinding_station") task("j0_o0", label="Batch Northview", job=0, position=0, machine="main_welding_station", duration=3) task("j0_o1", label="Batch Northview", job=0, position=1, machine="west_grinding_station", duration=2) task("j1_o0", label="Batch Concord", job=1, position=0, machine="west_grinding_station", duration=4) task("j1_o1", label="Batch Concord", job=1, position=1, machine="main_welding_station", duration=3) before("j0_o0", "j0_o1") before("j1_o0", "j1_o1") no_overlap("main_welding_station") no_overlap("west_grinding_station") penalize("makespan", weight=1) 

Principal compiled constraints: 

horizon = 12 starts[’j0_o0’] = model.NewIntVar(0, horizon, ’j0_o0_s’) ends[’j0_o0’] = model.NewIntVar(0, horizon, ’j0_o0_e’) intervals[’j0_o0’] = model.NewIntervalVar(starts[’j0_o0’], 3, ends[’j0_o0’], ’j0_o0_iv’) ... # same three lines per task model.Add(starts[’j0_o1’] >= ends[’j0_o0’]) model.Add(starts[’j1_o1’] >= ends[’j1_o0’]) model.AddNoOverlap([intervals[’j0_o0’], intervals[’j1_o1’]]) # main_welding_station model.AddNoOverlap([intervals[’j0_o1’], intervals[’j1_o0’]]) # west_grinding_station _ms = model.NewIntVar(0, horizon, ’makespan’) model.AddMaxEquality(_ms, [ends[’j0_o0’], ends[’j0_o1’], ends[’j1_o0’], ends[’j1_o1’]]) penalties.append(_ms) total = model.NewIntVar(0, 99999999, ’total’) model.Add(total == sum(penalties)) model.Minimize(total) 

Figure 3: Worked end-to-end translation: natural-language instance → SDDL → compiled CP-SAT model. 

You are completing an automated benchmark. The user message contains a scheduling problem and an exact output format. Begin your response with the first schedule line and output only the schedule in that format -- nothing else: no preamble, no explanation, no reasoning, no markdown formatting (no **bold**, no ‘inline code‘, no triple-backtick code blocks), no XML tags such as < schedule> or <answer>, no tool tags, no Python code. Do not call any tools, do not invoke external solvers, and do not generate code to be executed -- solve the problem yourself using only your own reasoning. Your response is fed directly into a parser; any extra characters cause the response to be discarded. 

Figure 4: D IRECT system prompt. 

Model Contrast b c p

qwen3.5-27b SDDL vs. D IRECT 100 5 5.0 × 10 −24 

SDDL vs. S OLVER 107 6 5.2 × 10 −25 

devstral-small-2-24b SDDL vs. D IRECT 82 1 1.7 × 10 −23 

SDDL vs. S OLVER 67 3 9.7 × 10 −17 

qwen3-coder-30b-a3b SDDL vs. D IRECT 70 1 6.1 × 10 −20 

SDDL vs. S OLVER 61 2 4.4 × 10 −16 

magistral-small-24b SDDL vs. D IRECT 41 0 9.1 × 10 −13 

SDDL vs. S OLVER 42 5 2.5 × 10 −8

Table 7: McNemar discordant counts ( b: SDDL-only feasible; c: comparison-only feasible) and two-sided p-values for the within-model contrasts; all remain significant after Holm correction ( padj < 10 −6). 

14 You are completing an automated benchmark. The user message contains a scheduling problem written in natural language and an exact output format. Do not solve the problem in your head and do not emit a schedule directly. Instead, write a single self-contained Python 3 program that solves the problem using ortools.sat.python.cp_model and prints the resulting schedule to standard output in exactly the output format the user message specifies. The first character of your response must be the first character of the program (typically "from" or "import"); output nothing else -- no preamble, no explanation, no reasoning, no markdown formatting, no triple-backtick code blocks, no XML tags, no comments outside the program body. Every piece of instance data must be transcribed from the user message into the program as Python literals. Do not read from any file, do not import a data module, do not make any network request, and do not depend on any environment variable, command-line argument, or side channel. The program must run to completion on its own with ‘python program.py‘ in a fresh directory with no network access. Allowed imports are the Python standard library and ortools.sat.python.cp_model -- nothing else. The program’s standard output must be, and only be, schedule lines in exactly the format the user message specifies -- the same character-level format that the direct-schedule condition uses. Do not print status labels, diagnostics, timings, or objective values; do not wrap the output in any envelope or code fence. If the solver returns INFEASIBLE or UNKNOWN, print nothing and exit cleanly. The program’s standard output is fed unchanged into the same parser used to score direct-schedule outputs; any extra characters cause the response to be discarded. ## CP-SAT modeling guide model = cp_model.CpModel(). Give every operation (job shop) or activity (project scheduling) one interval: start and end as NewIntVar bounded by horizon = sum of all durations, linked by NewIntervalVar(start, duration, end). Milestones are intervals of duration 0. ## Constraints - Precedence: for each successor entry, model.Add(start_b >= end_a). - Job-shop machine (one operation at a time): AddNoOverlap over exactly the intervals assigned to that machine. - Renewable resource pool (capacity limit while active): AddCumulative over the demanding intervals with their per-task demands and the pool’s capacity. NEVER encode a renewable pool with AddNoOverlap. - Nonrenewable budget (consumed once): a single linear constraint, model.Add(sum of consumed amounts <= total). - Alternative execution modes: one BoolVar per mode with AddExactlyOne; each mode contributes NewOptionalIntervalVar carrying that mode’s duration, its demands to the relevant AddCumulative calls, and its consumption to the budget constraint. - Slot-conflict groups (timetabling): AddAllDifferent over the tasks’ slot variables; forbidden times: model.Add(slot != t). ## Objective makespan = NewIntVar(0, horizon); AddMaxEquality(makespan, all ends); model.Minimize(makespan). Solve with cp_model.CpSolver(); set solver.parameters.max_time_in_seconds = 240. ## Rules 1. One interval per operation or activity, including start and finish milestones. 2. One AddNoOverlap per job-shop machine; AddCumulative for every capacity-limited pool. 3. One precedence constraint per successor entry; transcribe all of an activity’s listed successors before moving to the next. Job-shop steps are chained consecutively. 4. An activity with one fixed profile uses a plain interval, not modes. 5. Transcribe every duration, demand, capacity, and total exactly as given. 6. Minimize makespan. 7. Print ONLY schedule lines, with display names exactly as written in the problem text. 

Figure 5: S OLVER system prompt. 

15 Solver-Mediated Generation Direct Generation Model N

Feas. 

(%) 

95% CI 

(%) 

R. fail 

(%) 

Med. gap 

(%) N

Feas. 

(%) 

95% CI 

(%) 

Med. gap 

(%) ∆ Feas. qwen3.5-27b + SDDL 300 55.3 [49.7, 60.9] 16.0 0.0 300 23.7 [19.2, 28.8] 395.8 +31.7 devstral-small-2-24b + SDDL 300 28.3 [23.5, 33.7] 30.0 0.0 300 1.3 [0.5, 3.4] 111.2 +27.0 

qwen3-coder-30b-a3b + SDDL 300 23.3 [18.9, 28.4] 28.7 0.0 300 0.3 [0.1, 1.9] 357.1 +23.0 qwen/qwen3.5-27b (2026-02-24) 300 21.7 [17.4, 26.7] 62.7 2.6 300 23.7 [19.2, 28.8] 395.8 −2.0 

magistral-small-24b + SDDL 300 15.0 [11.4, 19.5] 47.3 0.0 300 1.3 [0.5, 3.4] 159.9 +13.7 devstral-small-2-24b (2025-12-09) 300 7.0 [4.6, 10.5] 66.7 0.0 300 1.3 [0.5, 3.4] 111.2 +5.7 qwen3-coder-30b-a3b (2025-07-31) 300 3.7 [2.1, 6.4] 74.3 0.0 300 0.3 [0.1, 1.9] 357.1 +3.3 magistral-small-24b (2025-09-17) 300 2.7 [1.4, 5.2] 88.0 0.0 300 1.3 [0.5, 3.4] 159.9 +1.3 

Table 8: Resource-constrained models across all three conditions, direct → solver-mediated → SDDL, in the format of Table 1. Brackets list 95% Wilson CIs on feasibility. Color follows one model across rows, with blue for qwen3.5-27b, orange for devstral-small-2-24b, green for qwen3-coder-30b-a3b, purple for magistral-small-24b. 

Cond. Family N Feas. (%) R. fail (%) Med. gap (%) 

SDDL JSSP 100 96.0 3.0 0.0 SDDL SM-RCPSP 100 17.0 44.0 0.0 SDDL MM-RCPSP 100 53.0 1.0 0.0 SOLVER JSSP 100 53.0 40.0 5.4 SOLVER SM-RCPSP 100 7.0 68.0 0.0 SOLVER MM-RCPSP 100 5.0 80.0 0.0 DIRECT JSSP 100 52.0 0.0 697.4 DIRECT SM-RCPSP 100 4.0 0.0 0.0 DIRECT MM-RCPSP 100 15.0 0.0 0.0 

Table 9: qwen3.5-27b by family and condition ( N = 300 convention; run-fail includes instances without a completed generation). 

Failure code qwen3.5 devstral q3-coder magistral Total 

Dropped / garbled precedence edges (tasks complete) 6 4 4 5 19 Referenced-but-undeclared real activity 1 2 0 3 6Phantom identifier (no problem counterpart) 1 1 0 0 2Duplicate task declarations 0 1 1 0 2Coverage collapse / label mismatch 0 1 2 0 3Primitive-argument misuse 0 0 1 0 1Emission derailment (prose drift, repetition, syntax slip) 2 0 0 1 3Coded / sampled 10/10 9/10 8/10 9/10 36/40 

Table 10: Hand-coded causes over a stratified sample of SDDL failures (one primary code per instance). 

16 The SDDL system prompt. 

You are completing an automated benchmark. The user message contains a scheduling problem written in natural language, followed by a "Response Format" section describing schedule lines. IGNORE that Response Format section entirely -- it describes a different answer mode and does not apply to you. Do not solve the problem and do not emit a schedule. Instead, translate the problem into SDDL: a small declarative language that a downstream compiler turns into an exact solver model. The first character of your response must be the first character of the DSL; output nothing else -- no preamble, no explanation, no reasoning, no markdown, no code fences, no XML tags, no comments. Every piece of instance data must be transcribed from the user message into the DSL as literals. Transcription accuracy is the whole task: a single wrong duration or machine silently produces a valid-looking but wrong answer. Do not omit any task, any precedence, or any resource. ## The 7 primitives resource(id, **props) a machine, renewable resource, or nonrenewable budget task(id, **props) one operation / activity to schedule before(a, b) HARD: task a finishes before task b starts no_overlap(resource_id) HARD: one task at a time on that resource conflict(t1, ..., group=) HARD: listed tasks cannot share a time slot not_at(id, day=, period=) HARD: the task cannot run at that time penalize(measure, weight=1) soft objective; measures: makespan, capacity, spread, isolated, room_stability ## Task properties - duration=N time length - label="Exact Name" REQUIRED on every task. See the Labels section below. - machine="rid" fixed resource assignment; pair with no_overlap(rid) - job=N, position=N job index and 0-BASED operation index within that job - demands={"r": n} renewable units used WHILE active - consumes={"b": n} nonrenewable units used ONCE - modes=[{"duration": N, "demands": {...}, "consumes": {...}}, ...] alternative execution modes; the solver picks exactly one ## Resource properties - capacity=N renewable: per-time-period limit - total=N nonrenewable: project-wide budget ## Labels -- read carefully, results are discarded without them ‘label‘ carries the entity’s display name from the problem text, verbatim: capitalization, spacing, and punctuation exactly as written. - Job-shop problems: label is the ITEM / JOB name ONLY, never with a step suffix; the 0-based step index goes in position=. - Project problems: label is the ACTIVITY name, including the named start and finish milestones. Every activity gets its own task() with its own label. ## Identifiers ‘id‘ and resource ids are sanitized snake_case, never the display name. Keys of demands={} / consumes={} MUST exactly match the corresponding resource() id. ## Rules 1. One task() per operation (job shop) or per activity (project scheduling), including start and finish milestones. 2. One resource() per machine, renewable resource, or nonrenewable budget. 3. One before() per SUCCESSOR ENTRY. Work through the activities in order; for each one, transcribe all of its listed successors before moving to the next. An activity listing k successors contributes k before() calls -- do not move on with a partial successor list. Job-shop steps are chained consecutively. 4. One no_overlap() per job-shop machine. NEVER use no_overlap for a project scheduling renewable resource -- capacity= plus demands={} already gives the correct cumulative semantics, and adding it makes the model wrong. 5. A mode dict omits resources it does not use. An activity with one fixed mode uses plain duration=/demands=/consumes=, not modes=[]. 6. End with one penalize() per stated objective, naming the measure that matches the problem’s objective and its weight. 7. Output ONLY the DSL calls. 

17