Title: EvoOptiGraph: Weakness-Driven Coevolution via Graph-Based Structural Generation for Optimization Modeling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.26578v1

Published Time: Fri, 26 Jun 2026 00:34:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
Preprint 

# EVO OPTI GRAPH : W EAKNESS -D RIVEN COEVOLUTION VIA GRAPH -B ASED STRUCTURAL GENERATION FOR 

# OPTIMIZATION MODELING 

Qingcan Kang 1, Mingyang LIU 2∗, Xiaojin Fu 1, Shixiong Kai 1, Tao Zhong 1, Mingxuan Yuan 1†

> 1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 

> 2

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong 

kangqingcan@huawei.com mingyaliu8-c@my.cityu.edu.hk 

# ABSTRACT 

Automating optimization modeling from natural language with large language mod-els (LLMs) faces two key challenges. First, training corpora lack structural diversity. Second, data generation pipelines remain static and decoupled from model learning. To address these challenges, we propose EvoOptiGraph , a novel framework where data and model co-evolve, driven by model weaknesses. EvoOptiGraph represents each mixed-integer linear program (MILP) as an attributed bipartite graph and applies validity-preserving evolutionary operators to generate structurally diverse instances. The evolved graphs are converted into solver code and natural language via deterministic compilation and verified back-translation. Training proceeds in two stages: supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on an initial dataset, followed by rein-forcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR), where graph-derived weakness signals guide the generation of new instances targeting the model’s failures. This forms a closed loop that continuously updates the training distribution. Empirical results on six public datasets show that EvoOptiGraph significantly outperforms larger generalist models, agentic methods, and specialized baselines in accuracy, ex-ecutability, and generalization. These results demonstrate that targeted data–model coevolution is an effective strategy for improving LLMs on optimization modeling tasks. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

Optimization modeling converts a natural-language decision problem into a formal mathematical program that can be solved by an optimization engine. This capability is central to applications in logistics, manufacturing, energy, and finance (Singh, 2012; Antoniou & Lu, 2007), but in practice it still depends heavily on human expertise. A modeler must identify decision variables, objectives, constraints, and domain assumptions, then translate them into solver-executable code. Automating this process is therefore an appealing but demanding testbed for large language models (LLMs). Recent work has explored prompt engineering (Ramamonjison et al., 2023), multi-agent reasoning (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024; Xiao et al., 2023), and domain-specific fine-tuning (Huang et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2024) to improve natural-language-to-optimization modeling. Two challenges limit current progress. First, training data for optimization modeling is narrow relative to the hypothesis space of valid formulations. Benchmarks such as NL4Opt (Ramamonjison et al., 2023) and MAMO (Huang et al., 2024) are valuable, but they cover only a small subset of the structural patterns encountered in mathematical programming (Xiao et al., 2025). Existing synthesis pipelines mainly vary coefficients or textual phrasing within fixed templates, which improves scale but not structural breadth. Text-only evolution methods can generate lexical diversity, yet they offer weak control over the underlying optimization structure (Li et al., 2024). Second, most training pipelines are static: a dataset is constructed once, and the model is then optimized against that frozen  

> *

Equal contribution. 

† Corresponding author. 

1

> arXiv:2606.26578v1 [cs.AI] 25 Jun 2026

Preprint distribution. Such a setup makes it difficult to identify which structural regimes the model fails on and to generate new instances that specifically target those weaknesses. We address these limitations with EvoOptiGraph , a weakness-driven coevolution framework of data and models that couples data generation and model training through an explicit structural representation. Our starting point is to represent each mixed-integer linear program (MILP) as an attributed bipartite graph whose nodes correspond to variables and constraints, and whose edges encode nonzero coefficients. This representation is expressive enough to recover solver-executable code, but structured enough to support validity-preserving genetic operations and fine-grained failure analysis. EvoOptiGraph uses this graph space in two ways: it evolves new optimization instances beyond parameter-level perturbations, and it diagnoses model weaknesses through graph-derived structural features computed on held-out validation problems. The training loop is closed rather than static. We first warm-start the model with supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on an initial population of verified instances. We then estimate a weakness profile for the current model by relating graph features to observed failures. That weakness profile guides further graph evolution, generating instances that are diverse, solvable, and structurally aligned with the model’s current blind spots. The newly evolved instances then feed into a reinforcement learning stage with verifiable rewards (RLVR), where rewards are defined by solver executability and solution correctness. In this way, the training distribution adapts as the model changes. Our contributions are threefold: • We propose a novel closed-loop coevolution framework for optimization modeling. 

Instead of separating data synthesis from model optimization, EvoOptiGraph links them through graph-level weakness analysis, enabling the training distribution to adapt to the model’s evolving failure modes. • We design a novel controllable graph-based generator for optimization instances. 

Crossover and mutation operate directly on attributed bipartite graphs, enabling structural-level evolution beyond parameter perturbations. Each evolved graph is deterministically compiled into solver code and back-translated into natural language, supporting systematic exploration of diverse optimization structures. • We develop an effective weakness-driven model adaptation with verifiable feedback. 

After supervised fine-tuning, we use graph-derived weakness signals to evolve new instances that target the model’s failures, and optimize the model with RLVR, where rewards are defined by solver executability and solution correctness. Experiments on six public benchmarks, including ComplexOR, MAMO, and NL4Opt, show that our framework improves optimization-modeling performance over strong baselines and yields better generalization to structurally challenging instances. Ablation studies further indicate that both components of the loop matter: graph-based structural evolution expands the support of the training data, while weakness-driven generation makes that expansion relevant to the model’s actual errors. 

# 2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 LLM S FOR OPTIMIZATION MODELING 

Recent work studies how LLMs translate natural-language problem statements into mathematical formulations or solver-executable code. Early efforts relied on prompt-based pipelines, such as the NL4Opt benchmark (Ramamonjison et al., 2023), which highlighted both the promise of LLMs and their tendency to omit constraints or hallucinate assumptions. Subsequent work improves inference-time reasoning via decomposition, multi-agent collaboration, and expert-style prompting, including OptiMUS (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024), Chain-of-Experts (Xiao et al., 2023), and AutoFormulation (Astorga et al., 2024). In parallel, task-specific models are developed through supervised fine-tuning, such as ORLM (Huang et al., 2025) and LLMOPT (Jiang et al., 2024). These approaches improve prompting, reasoning, or task adaptation under a fixed training distribu-tion. In contrast, we focus on constructing and iteratively adapting the data distribution to expose structurally informative instances during training. EvoOptiGraph is complementary to prior modeling architectures and can be combined with stronger inference-time reasoning. 2Preprint 2.2 DATA SYNTHESIS FOR OPTIMIZATION MODELING 

Data quality is a key bottleneck for optimization-modeling LLMs (Xiao et al., 2025). A common approach is parametric template expansion, where canonical problem families are instantiated by varying sizes, coefficients, or templates (Lu et al., 2025). While controllable and verifiable, such methods generate instances close to fixed structural templates. Recent work explores broader synthesis: MILP-Evolve (Li et al., 2024) iteratively evolves MILP classes via text-based operators on seed problems, OptMATH (Lu et al., 2025) constructs aligned triplets via bidirectional generation and solution matching, and MIPLIB-NL (Li et al., 2026) reverse-generates natural-language descriptions for real-world MILP instances. Other works focus on generating MILP instances primarily for solver evaluation and algorithm stress-testing (e.g., G2MILP (Geng et al., 2023; Alipour et al., 2023), MILP-StuDio (Liu et al., 2024d), and instance-space evolution (Smith-Miles & Bowly, 2015; Liu et al., 2024b; Bowly, 2019)), while our goal is to create training data for LLM-based modeling from natural language. Our work is closely related to structure-aware instance generation but differs in two aspects. First, EvoOptiGraph applies genetic operations directly on graph representations that preserve optimization structure, rather than relying on textual mutation or parameter perturbation. Second, generation is adaptive: instances are scored by alignment with model weaknesses, enabling dynamic rather than static synthesis. 2.3 MODEL TRAINING AND REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 

SFT is the standard starting point, but token-level likelihood does not directly optimize solver correctness or executability. RL with external verification is therefore widely adopted, including outcome-based rewards (Chen et al., 2025), process supervision with reward models (Dai et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2025), and preference-based objectives such as DPO (Zheng et al., 2025a). Other approaches combine LLMs with search strategies, including beam search, Monte Carlo Tree Search, and evolutionary self-improvement (Wang et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025b; Liu et al., 2024c; Ye et al., 2024). For operations research tasks, OR-PRM evaluates intermediate reasoning steps (Wang et al.). However, these methods typically rely on fixed training datasets and do not adapt data distributions to model weaknesses. EvoOptiGraph builds on this line of work but shifts the focus to data generation. We also optimize with verifiable rewards, but instead of sampling from a static pool, we diagnose structural error patterns and evolve new instances that target them, turning RL into an adaptive data-model coevolution loop. 

# 3 METHODOLOGY 

3.1 PROBLEM FORMULATION AND GRAPH REPRESENTATION 

We study natural-language-to-optimization modeling : given a problem description q ∈ Q , where 

Q denotes the space of natural-language descriptions, the goal is to generate a correct optimization model together with its solver-executable implementation. We focus on mixed-integer linear programs (MILPs), which cover a large family of practical decision problems. A MILP can be written as 

min / max c⊤x

s.t. Ax ▷◁ b,

l ≤ x ≤ u,xi ∈ Z for i ∈ I , xj ∈ R for j ∈ R ,

where x = ( x1, . . . , x n) is the decision vector, c is the objective coefficient vector, A is the constraint matrix, b is the right-hand-side vector, and ▷◁ ∈ {≤ , =, ≥} m specifies the constraint senses. Variable bounds are denoted by l and u, and I and R index integer and continuous variables, respectively. We denote the algebraic formulation by P = (min / max , c, A, b, ▷◁, l, u, I, R), and its solver-executable program (e.g., Gurobi code) by V(P).To support both structured generation and failure analysis, we represent each MILP as an attributed bipartite graph G = ( V, E, A), following the variable–constraint graph representation widely used in learning-based MILP research (Gasse et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2023). Specifically: (1) Nodes: 3Preprint 

Figure 1: Weakness-Guided Data–Model Coevolution Framework. 

V = Vcon ∪ Vvar , where Vcon = {s1, . . . , s m, s obj } contains one node per constraint together with a dedicated objective node, and Vvar = {x1, . . . , x n} contains one node per decision variable. (2) Edges: E ⊆ Vcon × Vvar ; an edge (si, x j ) is present when variable xj appears in constraint si or in the objective with a nonzero coefficient, and the edge weight stores that coefficient. (3) Attributes: A constraint node stores its type, right-hand side, and relational sense; a variable node stores its lower bound, upper bound, and variable type. This graph serves as an internal representation for data generation and weakness diagnosis. It is manipulable (crossover and mutation operate directly on variables, constraints, coefficients, and substructures) and analyzable (graph statistics summarize structural regimes where the model succeeds or fails). A valid graph has exactly one objective node, complete variable metadata, and no isolated components; from any valid G we deterministically recover P and V(P).The learning problem is therefore to estimate a mapping fθ : Q → V from natural-language descriptions to solver-executable programs. EvoOptiGraph improves this mapping indirectly by controlling the structure of the training data and adapting that structure over time. 3.2 CONTROLLABLE DATA GENERATION VIA GRAPH EVOLUTION 

We generate training instances by evolving graphs rather than only perturbing textual descriptions or numeric parameters. The initial population is built from 53 expert-designed seed generators from OptMATH (Lu et al., 2025), each corresponding to a classical problem family such as transportation, knapsack, or facility location. Sampling the parameters of these generators yields an initial dataset 

D0 = {(qi, Gi, c i)}N0

> i=1

, where qi is a natural-language description, Gi is the graph representation of the optimization instance, and ci = V(Pi) is the executable solver program compiled from the graph. 

Genetic operations with structural constraints. We apply genetic operators directly to G subject to validity constraints. Crossover exchanges compatible subgraphs between two parent instances. In the default setting, crossover is performed within the same problem class to preserve semantic coherence; a smaller number of cross-class operations is allowed to increase structural diversity. The objective node is handled separately so that each offspring still contains exactly one objective. 

Mutation acts at three levels. Parameter mutation perturbs numerical quantities such as coefficients, bounds, and right-hand sides. Structural mutation edits local graph topology by inserting, deleting, or modifying variables or constraints while preserving linearity and metadata consistency. Scale mutation changes problem size, e.g., expanding supply/demand nodes in a transportation instance. Every offspring is filtered by deterministic validity checks before entering the candidate pool. Figure 2 shows an example: crossing a production scheduling problem (A) with a knapsack (B) yields hybrid (C); mutating (C)’s knapsack capacity (100 →90) gives (C’). See appendix for full details. 4Preprint 

Quality control and fitness function. Each candidate instance is verified before entering the training pool. The first stage checks graph structural validity. The second stage compiles the graph into Gurobi code and executes it. For feasible instances, we record solver statistics such as solve time and branch-and-bound nodes as difficulty metadata. For infeasible instances, we compute an Irreducible Infeasible Subset (IIS) (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2024; Chinneck, 2008); instances with non-empty IIS are retained because they still define meaningful optimization structures, while candidates that fail to compile or execute are discarded. Verification metadata is cached to avoid redundant solver calls. The fitness function balances three normalized objectives (min-max scaling to 

[0 , 1] ): 

f (G) = β ˜fdiff + γ ˜fdiv + δ ˜fweak .

Difficulty ˜fdiff is derived from solver statistics and favors nontrivial instances. Diversity ˜fdiv is the average graph edit distance (GED) (Gao et al., 2010; Gasse et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2023) to the current population, discouraging collapse to a few templates. Weakness alignment ˜fweak is the cosine similarity between the candidate’s structural feature vector ϕ(G) and the current model weakness vector w (Section 3.3). This term is inactive initially ( δ = 0 ) and becomes important once the model has enough validation evidence to estimate its failure modes. 

Back translation to natural language. For each verified graph, we prompt an LLM (e.g., GPT-4) with its serialization and provenance to generate a natural-language description. A three-stage verification ensures quality: (1) rule-based checks (numerical consistency, coverage of variables and constraints, fidelity to objective and operator types); (2) an independent LLM (e.g., Claude-3) checks logical compatibility, regenerating up to a fixed budget if needed; (3) periodic value-matching audits on sampled instances (reconstruct solver code via a separate forward-modeling system and compare outcomes). 

Figure 2: Crossover and mutation example. (a) Production scheduling; (b) knapsack; (c) hybrid after crossover (C); (d) mutated from C (C’, capacity 100 →90). Red highlight indicates mutation. 3.3 TWO -S TAGE MODEL TRAINING AND COEVOLUTION LOOP 

The training loop alternates between model fitting and data evolution: the current model is evaluated on a held-out validation set, and its failure patterns are summarized as a weakness vector w, which biases the generator toward informative instances for RL. Algorithm 1 outlines the procedure. 

Warm-up supervised fine-tuning. We train a base LLM on the initial dataset D0 by standard next-token prediction: LSFT = − P 

> t

log Pθ (ct | c<t , q ), where D0 is generated from seed problems via graph evolution, q is the problem description and ct is the t-th token of the solver code, yielding an initial policy Mwarm competent for error analysis. 

Structured weakness analysis. In each coevolution round, we evaluate the current model on a held-out validation set whose instances are paired with graphs and ground-truth outcomes. For every graph 5Preprint 

Algorithm 1 EvoOptiGraph Training Loop 

1: Input: Seed generators S, base LLM with parameters θ0, validation set Vval = {(Gi, y i)}Nval 

> i=1

,number of iterations T

2: Output: Optimized model parameters θT

3: D0 ← EvoGenerate (S) ▷ initial population 

4: θwarm ← arg min θ LSFT (θ; D0) ▷ warm-up SFT 

5: θ0 ← θwarm 

6: for t = 1 to T do 

7: Et ← { (G, y ) ∈ V val | Mθt−1 (G)̸ = y} ▷ error set 

8: Φt ← { ϕ(G) | G ∈ V val } ▷ feature vectors 

9: wt ← SHAP  XGBoost ({(ϕ(G), 1(G,y )∈E t )})

10: Evolve new data using fitness: f (G) = β ˜fdiff + γ ˜fdiv + δ ˜fweak 

11: DRL ← EvoGenerate (S, f (G), wt) ▷ weakness-targeted data 

12: Sample candidate responses {yi}Gi=1 ∼ πθt−1 (· | q) for each (q, f opt ) ∈ D RL 

13: Extract code blocks {ci}Gi=1 from {yi}Gi=1 and execute them in parallel 

14: Compute staged rewards {Ri}Gi=1 using Rprocess + Rsolvable + Rproximity + Rcorrectness 

15: θt ← arg max θ JGRPO (θ; θt−1, DRL , {Ri}) ▷ RL update 

16: end for 

17: return θT

G, we compute a structural feature vector ϕ(G) that includes size statistics (numbers of variables and constraints), type information (e.g., proportions of binary and integer variables), sparsity and density measures, graph-topological features (such as average degree and spectral quantities), and coefficient statistics (see Appendix for a detailed list). These features provide a low-dimensional summary of the optimization. We train an XGBoost classifier (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) to predict whether the model solves an instance correctly from ϕ(G). To extract interpretable feature contributions, we compute SHAP values (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) on the error cases. The weakness weight for feature 

k is wk = 1

> |E|

P 

> i∈E

SHAP i,k , where E is the set of validation instances answered incorrectly by the current model. The resulting vector w = [ w1, . . . , w d] summarizes structural properties most associated with failure and serves as a practical prioritization signal, not a causal statement. 

Weakness-driven reinforcement learning. Using w, we rerun the evolutionary generator and activate the weakness-alignment term ˜fweak = cosine_similarity (ϕ(G), w), which biases evolution toward instances whose structure resembles the model’s current failure regime. We then generate a new dataset DRL by evolving instances with this weakness-aligned fitness for RL. We formulate the update as reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) (Lambert et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2026). Each training example comprises a description q and its ground-truth optimal objective value fopt ; the corresponding graph and solver code are used offline. During RL, the model generates a response, we extract and execute its code with Gurobi. The reward is a multi-stage sum: 

R(c) = Rprocess (c) + Rsolvable (c) + Rproximity (c) + Rcorrectness (c),

where Rprocess (c) = 0 .2 if code executes without Python error, else 0. Let relerr := |fmodel −fopt ||fopt |+δ

denote the relative error between the solver’s returned objective fmodel and the ground-truth objective value fopt , with δ = 10 −8. If the solver returns a feasible solution, we set Rsolvable = 0 .1 and 

Rproximity = 0 .2 · max(0 , 1 − relerr /0.1) ; otherwise both are 0. Thus Rproximity decays linearly from 

0.2 at relerr = 0 to 0 at relerr = 0 .1 (10% relative error). Intuitively, a solution whose relative error is within 10% of the ground truth is more likely to capture the main structure (e.g., minor coefficient errors), while a large deviation tends to signal a fundamental mistake. The correctness bonus is 

Rcorrectness = 0 .5 when solver status is optimal and relerr ≤ τrel (τrel = 10 −4), else 0. Total reward in [0 , 1] . This layered design encourages runnable code, any feasible solution, numerical closeness (within 10%), and exact matches. To optimize the policy πθ , we adopt group-relative policy optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025). For each prompt q, we sample N candidate responses {yi}Ni=1 from the current 6Preprint Table 1: The overall performance of EvoOptiGraph and baselines with Pass@1 accuracy (%) on six OR benchmarks. Scores cited from original publications are marked with the symbol (*), while missing entries are denoted with (-). Best results are highlighted in bold and the second-highest values are underlined. Model Params NL4OPT MAMO NLP4LP CompOR IndOR Avg. EasyLP ComplexLP                                                                                           

> Zero-shot LLMs
> GPT-4o Closed 73.4 95.2 46.0 87.6 38.9 66.7 68.0
> DeepSeek-V3 671B 79.9 96.7 55.0 94.9 44.4 69.1 73.3
> Qwen3-32B 32B 76.1 96.9 32.4 90.5 38.9 57.1 65.3
> Qwen2.5-72B-Inst 72B 79.9 95.8 33.3 89.9 38.9 61.9 66.6
> Agentic Methods
> OptiMUS-v0.3 Closed 79.8 92.4 52.1 89.8 52.2 54.3 70.1
> CoT Closed 62.2 49.5 42.3 74.7 39.2 40.5 51.4
> CoE Closed 66.7 94.4 50.6 87.4 57.1 31.2 64.6
> Fine-tuned LLMs
> ORLM 8B 73.8 90.4 59.5 76.4 50.0 42.9 65.5
> LLMOPT (origin) 14B 80.3* 89.5* 44.1* 73.4* 35.3* 29.0* 58.6*
> OptMATH (origin) 32B 95.9* 89.9* 54.1* ----
> EvoOptiGraph 8B 96.7 98.0 69.4 97.2 50.0 57.1 78.1

Abbreviations: CompOR: ComplexOR, IndOR: IndustryOR, Avg: Macro-Average, Inst: Instruct. 

policy πθold , evaluate their rewards {Ri}Ni=1 , and normalize them within the group to obtain advantages 

ˆAi = ( Ri − μR)/σ R. We then maximize 

JGRPO (θ) = Eq∼D RL , {yi}∼ πθold 

"

1

N

> N

X

> i=1



min 



ri(θ) ˆAi, clip (ri(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAi



− eβ · DKL (πθ ∥πref )

#

,

where ri(θ) = πθ (yi|q)  

> πθold (yi|q)

is the importance ratio, ϵ is the clipping hyperparameter, eβ controls the KL penalty strength, and πref is the SFT reference policy. The KL term regularizes the RL update so that the policy does not drift too far from the supervised initialization while still exploiting solver-based rewards. 

Iterative coevolution loop. At each iteration t, we first diagnose the current model Mt on the validation set to obtain the weakness vector wt. We then evolve new instances using weakness-aligned fitness to generate DRL , and update Mt to Mt+1 via GRPO. This closed loop makes the data distribution co-evolve with the model, generating new data in response to observed errors rather than statically. Figure 1 shows our overall framework diagram. 

# 4 EXPERIMENTS 

4.1 EXPERIMENT SETUP 

Data Generation. We generate training data via genetic graph evolution. Starting from 53 expert-designed seed problem families Lu et al. (2025), the generator applies mutation and crossover operators to produce new optimization instances. Beyond the original 53 families, we additionally construct 30 cross-family hybrid categories through inter-class crossover. These hybrid categories make up about 20% of the data generated in each round. In terms of scale, we use 5,000 generated instances for the initial SFT stage. After warm-up, each RL iteration uses a newly generated pool of 1,000 instances. We further generate 2,000 additional instances per iteration for structured weakness analysis, which are used to train the XGBoost classifier. 

Benchmarks. Our evaluation is conducted on six public benchmarks commonly used in the OR community: NL4Opt Ramamonjison et al. (2023), MAMO, which is divided into EasyLP and ComplexLP Huang et al. (2024), NLP4LP AhmadiTeshnizi et al. (2024), ComplexOR Xiao et al. (2023), IndustryOR Tang et al. (2024). See Appendix for more details about these benchmarks. 7Preprint captionAblation study with Pass@1 accuracy (%) on six OR benchmarks.                        

> Type NL4OPT MAMO NLP4LP CompOR IndOR Avg. EasyLP ComplexLP
> All-SFT 85.5 96.0 55.9 91.6 38.9 42.9 68.5 ( ↓9.6% )
> All-RL 72.0 96.3 33.3 87.6 38.9 52.4 63.4 ( ↓14.7% )

Baseline. To ensure a thorough comparison, we benchmark against a comprehensive set of baselines spanning three categories: zero-shot generalist LLMs, specialized fine-tuned LLMs, and agentic methods. The zero-shot generalist LLMs include GPT-4o OpenAI (2026), DeepSeek-V3 Liu et al. (2024a), Qwen3-32B Yang et al. (2025), and Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct Qwen et al. (2025). The specialized fine-tuned LLMs include ORLM (8B) Tang et al. (2024), LLMOPT (14B) Jiang et al. (2024), and OptMATH (32B) Lu et al. (2025). The agentic methods include multi-step reasoning frameworks that orchestrate LLMs to solve problems, such as OptiMUS-v0.3 AhmadiTeshnizi et al. (2024), Chain-of-Thought (CoT) Wei et al. (2022) and Chain-of-Experts (CoE) Xiao et al. (2023). For OptiMUS-v0.3, we use the results reported by Zhang et al. (2026), while for CoE, CoT, and ORLM, we use the results reported by Xiao et al. (2025), as their evaluations are conducted on the same dataset as ours, namely the cleaned version released by Xiao et al. (2025). For OptMATH and LLMOPT, we report results from the published papers; since they were evaluated on uncleaned datasets, these results are for reference only and may not be directly comparable to ours. 

Implementation Details. In the back-translation stage of data generation, we use DeepSeek-V3 Liu et al. (2024a) to generate natural-language descriptions from verified graph instances. We adopt the prompting framework of OptMATH Lu et al. (2025), which consists of three stages—generate, check, and regenerate—with full prompt details provided in the appendix. We develop EvoOptiGraph by fine-tuning the publicly available Qwen3-8B Yang et al. (2025) model. Detailed configurations and procedures of the fine-tuning process are also deferred to the appendix. As the primary evaluation metric, we adopt pass@1 accuracy, which measures whether the optimal objective value obtained from the generated optimization code matches the reference value provided by the benchmark. 4.2 MAIN RESULTS 

Table 1 presents the overall Pass@1 results on six OR benchmarks. Overall, EvoOptiGraph achieves the best performance among all compared methods, obtaining a macro-average Pass@1 of 78.1%. It consistently outperforms zero-shot LLMs, agentic methods, and prior fine-tuned models, showing the effectiveness of our two-stage model training and coevolution loop. Across individual benchmarks, EvoOptiGraph achieves the strongest or tied-best results on nearly all tasks, demonstrating robust generalization across diverse optimization problem types. Notably, this performance is achieved with an 8B backbone, yet it still surpasses substantially larger models. This suggests that, for optimization-oriented code generation, targeted data evolution and structured weakness adaptation can be more effective than simply increasing model scale. 4.3 DATA DIVERSITY COMPARISON 

We evaluate data diversity using the Structural Similarity metric introduced in GenBench-MILP Luo et al. (2026). Specifically, we compare the similarity between the generated instances and the 53 original problem types for two data generation methods: OptMATH Lu et al. (2025) and our method. Under this metric, lower similarity indicates higher diversity. For each method, we first generate 5,000 instances in total. Then, to ensure a statistically meaningful comparison, we randomly sample 212 instances at a time, compute their structural similarity to the 53 original problem types, and repeat this process 50 times. We report the average similarity over these 50 runs. The results show that the instances generated by our method achieve a structural similarity of 66.93%, whereas those generated by OptMATH achieve 93.04%. This substantial gap indicates that our method produces significantly more diverse data. A possible reason is that OptMATH mainly perturbs the explicit parameters of the original problems, while our method modifies the underlying problem structure itself, leading to richer structural variations. 8Preprint 

Figure 3: Accuracy trajectory across the coevolution loop. The relative improvement of current iteration over the previous one is demonstrated on the corresponding bar. 4.4 ANALYSIS OF COEVOLUTION LOOP 

We analyze the coevolution loop by tracking model performance from the base model to the warm-up SFT stage and three subsequent reinforcement-learning rounds. Figure 3 reveals three observations. First, the warm-up SFT stage provides the largest foundational improvement across all benchmarks, especially on structurally challenging datasets such as MAMO-complex and ComplexOR, indicating that supervised training on verified optimization data is critical for establishing basic optimization modeling and code-generation competence. Second, the subsequent coevolution rounds consistently build on top of the SFT model on most benchmarks, yielding steady additional gains. This trend suggests that the weakness-guided generate-and-train loop continues to uncover informative failure modes even after supervised learning has saturated, rather than merely repeating the same data distribution. We also observe a non-monotonic trajectory on MAMO-complex, where performance drops at RL2 before recovering at RL3, which suggests that adaptive data evolution may temporarily overspecialize to certain failure regimes but remains self-correcting over subsequent rounds. 4.5 ABLATION STUDY 

To investigate the effectiveness of the two-stage training scheme and the coevolution loop, we conduct an ablation study with two variants: SFT-only and RL-only. Compared with SFT-only and RL-only, EvoOptiGraph improves the average accuracy by 9.6% and 14.7%, respectively. Detailed results are presented in the last row of Table 1 and Table ?? . We find that SFT-only brings clear gains in the first round, but its improvement soon saturates and can even deteriorate in later rounds. One possible explanation is that repeated supervised updates on synthetic data may cause the model to overfit to recurring data patterns, while failing to further improve outcome-level optimization correctness. In contrast, RL-only shows only limited improvement, likely because without an SFT warm-up, the model does not have a sufficiently strong initialization, making reward-driven learning unstable and inefficient. For the accuracy trajectory, please refer to Figures 4 and 5 in the appendix. 

# 5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

We presented EvoOptiGraph, a weakness-driven coevolution framework of data and models for natural-language-to-optimization modeling. By representing MILPs as attributed bipartite graphs, it unifies structural data generation, failure diagnosis, and model adaptation in a closed loop, combining supervised fine-tuning with reinforcement learning under verifiable solver-based rewards. Experi-ments on multiple public benchmarks show consistent gains over baselines; our 8B model achieves the best macro-average Pass@1, demonstrating that targeted structural data evolution can be more effective than scaling model size alone. Stage-wise and ablation results confirm that weakness-driven coevolution yields additional gains beyond SFT or RL alone. 9Preprint Several limitations remain: the current framework is limited to MILPs and the coverage of available seed generators, verification becomes expensive for larger instances, and the weakness vector is a practical prioritization signal rather than a causal account. Future work includes extending EvoOpti-Graph to broader optimization classes, improving efficiency, and studying transferability of weakness signals across problem families. We hope this work offers a useful step toward adaptive training pipelines for formal reasoning and optimization with large language models. 

# REFERENCES 

Ali AhmadiTeshnizi, Wenzhi Gao, and Madeleine Udell. Optimus: Scalable optimization modeling with (mi) lp solvers and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10172 , 2024. Hossein Alipour, Mario Andrés Muñoz, and Kate Smith-Miles. Enhanced instance space analysis for the maximum flow problem. European Journal of Operational Research , 304(2):411–428, 2023. Andreas Antoniou and Wu-Sheng Lu. Practical optimization: algorithms and engineering applications . Springer, 2007. Nicolás Astorga, Tennison Liu, Yuanzhang Xiao, and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Autoformulation of mathematical optimization models using llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.01679 , 2024. David B Blumenthal, Nicolas Boria, Johann Gamper, Sébastien Bougleux, and Luc Brun. Comparing heuristics for graph edit distance computation: Db blumenthal et al. The VLDB journal , 29(1):419–458, 2020. Simon Bowly. Stress testing mixed integer programming solvers through new test instance generation methods. 

PhD thesis, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2019. Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pp. 785–794, 2016. Yitian Chen, Jingfan Xia, Siyu Shao, Dongdong Ge, and Yinyu Ye. Solver-informed rl: Grounding large language models for authentic optimization modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11792 , 2025. John W Chinneck. Feasibility and infeasibility in optimization: algorithms and computational methods . Springer, 2008. Ning Dai, Zheng Wu, Renjie Zheng, Ziyun Wei, Wenlei Shi, Xing Jin, Guanlin Liu, Chen Dun, Liang Huang, and Lin Yan. Process supervision-guided policy optimization for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17621 , 2024. Zhenan Fan, Xinglu Wang, Oleksandr Yakovenko, Abdullah Ali Sivas, Owen Ren, Yong Zhang, and Zirui Zhou. Smart initial basis selection for linear programs. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 9650–9664. PMLR, 2023. Xinbo Gao, Bing Xiao, Dacheng Tao, and Xuelong Li. A survey of graph edit distance. Pattern Analysis and applications , 13(1):113–129, 2010. Maxime Gasse, Didier Chételat, Nicola Ferroni, Laurent Charlin, and Andrea Lodi. Exact combinatorial optimization with graph convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems ,32, 2019. Zijie Geng, Xijun Li, Jie Wang, Xiao Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. A deep instance generative framework for milp solvers under limited data availability. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 26025–26047, 2023. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, 2024. URL https://www.gurobi.com .Chenyu Huang, Zhengyang Tang, Shixi Hu, Ruoqing Jiang, Xin Zheng, Dongdong Ge, Benyou Wang, and Zizhuo Wang. Orlm: A customizable framework in training large models for automated optimization modeling. 

Operations Research , 73(6):2986–3009, 2025. Xuhan Huang, Qingning Shen, Yan Hu, Anningzhe Gao, and Benyou Wang. Mamo: a mathematical modeling benchmark with solvers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13144 , 2024. 

10 Preprint 

Caigao Jiang, Xiang Shu, Hong Qian, Xingyu Lu, Jun Zhou, Aimin Zhou, and Yang Yu. Llmopt: Learning to define and solve general optimization problems from scratch. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13213 , 2024. Yuxin Jiang, Yufei Wang, Qiyuan Zhang, Xingshan Zeng, Liangyou Li, Jierun Chen, Chaofan Tao, Haoli Bai, and Lifeng Shang. From verifiable dot to reward chain: Harnessing verifiable reference-based rewards for reinforcement learning of open-ended generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18533 , 2026. Nathan Lambert, Jacob Morrison, Valentina Pyatkin, Shengyi Huang, Hamish Ivison, Faeze Brahman, Lester James V Miranda, Alisa Liu, Nouha Dziri, Shane Lyu, et al. Tulu 3: Pushing frontiers in open language model post-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15124 , 2024. Sirui Li, Janardhan Kulkarni, Ishai Menache, Cathy Wu, and Beibin Li. Towards foundation models for mixed integer linear programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08288 , 2024. Zhong Li, Hongliang Lu, Tao Wei, Wenyu Liu, Yuxuan Chen, Yuan Lan, Fan Zhang, and Zaiwen Wen. Constructing industrial-scale optimization modeling benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10450 , 2026. Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 , 2024a. Chang Liu, Kate Smith-Miles, Tony Wauters, and Alysson M Costa. Instance space analysis for 2d bin packing mathematical models. European Journal of Operational Research , 315(2):484–498, 2024b. Fei Liu, Xialiang Tong, Mingxuan Yuan, Xi Lin, Fu Luo, Zhenkun Wang, Zhichao Lu, and Qingfu Zhang. Evolution of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02051 , 2024c. Haoyang Liu, Jie Wang, Wanbo Zhang, Zijie Geng, Yufei Kuang, Xijun Li, Bin Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. Milp-studio: Milp instance generation via block structure decomposition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:54357–54395, 2024d. Hongliang Lu, Zhonglin Xie, Yaoyu Wu, Can Ren, Yuxuan Chen, and Zaiwen Wen. Optmath: A scalable bidirectional data synthesis framework for optimization modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11102 , 2025. Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 30, 2017. Yidong Luo, Chenguang Wang, Dong Li, and Tianshu Yu. Are your generated instances truly useful? genbench-milp: A benchmark suite for milp instance generation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505. 24779 .OpenAI. Chatgpt (GPT-4o version) [large language model], 2026. URL https://chat.openai.com .Accessed: 2026-04-29. Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115 .Rindranirina Ramamonjison, Timothy Yu, Raymond Li, Haley Li, Giuseppe Carenini, Bissan Ghaddar, Shiqi He, Mahdi Mostajabdaveh, Amin Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Zirui Zhou, et al. Nl4opt competition: Formulating optimization problems based on their natural language descriptions. In NeurIPS 2022 Competition Track , pp. 189–203. PMLR, 2023. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. Ajay Singh. An overview of the optimization modelling applications. Journal of Hydrology , 466:167–182, 2012. Kate Smith-Miles and Simon Bowly. Generating new test instances by evolving in instance space. Computers & Operations Research , 63:102–113, 2015. Zhengyang Tang, Chenyu Huang, Xin Zheng, Shixi Hu, Zizhuo Wang, Dongdong Ge, and Benyou Wang. Orlm: Training large language models for optimization modeling. arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2405, 2024. 

11 Preprint 

Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9(86):2579–2605, 2008. Leandro von Werra, Younes Belkada, Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Tristan Thrush, Nathan Lambert, Shengyi Huang, Kashif Rasul, and Quentin Gallouédec. TRL: Transformers Reinforcement Learning, 2020. URL https://github.com/huggingface/trl .Teng Wang, Wing-Yin Yu, Zhenqi He, Zehua Liu, Hailei Gong, Han Wu, Xiongwei Han, Wei Shi, Ruifeng She, Fangzhou Zhu, and Tao Zhong. Bpp-search: Enhancing tree of thought reasoning for mathematical modeling problem solving, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17404 .Yilin Wang, Heng Zhou, Dongxing Mao, Linjie Li, Jingru Tan, Haochen Han, Zhengyuan Yang, Alex Jinpeng Wang, and Min Li. Or-prm: A process reward model for algorithmic problem in operations research. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. Ziyang Xiao, Dongxiang Zhang, Yangjun Wu, Lilin Xu, Yuan Jessica Wang, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin Fu, Tao Zhong, Jia Zeng, Mingli Song, et al. Chain-of-experts: When llms meet complex operations research problems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Ziyang Xiao, Jingrong Xie, Lilin Xu, Shisi Guan, Jingyan Zhu, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin Fu, WingYin Yu, Han Wu, Wei Shi, et al. A survey of optimization modeling meets llms: Progress and future directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10047 , 2025. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. Angen Ye, Zeyu Zhang, Boyuan Wang, Xiaofeng Wang, Dapeng Zhang, and Zheng Zhu. Vla-r1: Enhancing reasoning in vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01623 , 2025. Haoran Ye, Jiarui Wang, Zhiguang Cao, Federico Berto, Chuanbo Hua, Haeyeon Kim, Jinkyoo Park, and Guojie Song. Reevo: Large language models as hyper-heuristics with reflective evolution. Advances in neural information processing systems , 37:43571–43608, 2024. Yansen Zhang, Qingcan Kang, Yujie Chen, Yufei Wang, Xiongwei Han, Tao Zhong, Mingxuan Yuan, and Chen Ma. Sac-opt: Semantic anchors for iterative correction in optimization modeling, 2026. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2510.05115 .Congmin Zheng, Jiachen Zhu, Jianghao Lin, Xinyi Dai, Yong Yu, Weinan Zhang, and Mengyue Yang. Cold: Counterfactually-guided length debiasing for process reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15698 ,2025a. Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan Ye, and Zheyan Luo. Llamafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100+ language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 3: system demonstrations) , pp. 400–410, 2024. Zhi Zheng, Zhuoliang Xie, Zhenkun Wang, and Bryan Hooi. Monte carlo tree search for comprehensive exploration in llm-based automatic heuristic design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.08603 , 2025b. Jiachen Zhu, Congmin Zheng, Jianghao Lin, Kounianhua Du, Ying Wen, Yong Yu, Jun Wang, and Weinan Zhang. Retrieval-augmented process reward model for generalizable mathematical reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 8453–8468, 2025. 

12 Preprint 

# A BENCHMARKS 

A large number of datasets and dataset-construction methods have been introduced to improve the capability of LLMs in solving OR problems, and these datasets have become increasingly complex and realistic Ahma-diTeshnizi et al. (2024). Xiao et al. (2025) provide a recent and comprehensive survey of benchmark datasets for natural-language-described optimization problems. Their study highlights several recurring issues in existing benchmarks, such as logical inconsistencies, ambiguous problem statements, and incorrect ground-truth answers, and further rectifies part of these errors. 

NL4OPT The NL4Opt dataset, introduced by Ramamonjison et al. (2023) for the NeurIPS 2022 NL4Opt competition, is a benchmark containing approximately 1,100 annotated linear programming problems. It is designed to study the mapping from natural language descriptions to formal optimization models. The original release comprises 713 training instances, 99 validation instances, and 289 test instances. Due to the noise and errors in the original dataset, we follow Xiao et al. (2025) and use their cleaned version instead. Specifically, our experiments are conducted on 214 cleaned instances. 

MAMO The MAMO dataset was introduced by Huang et al. (2024) as a benchmark for evaluating large language models on mathematical modeling tasks. It focuses on LP and MILP problems, with an emphasis on the formulation process rather than the solving step itself. The original dataset is divided into two subsets: Easy LP with 652 instances and Complex LP with 211 instances. In our work, rather than using the original release directly, we adopt the cleaned version provided by Xiao et al. After data cleaning, we use 545 easy instances and 111 complex instances in our experiments. 

NLP4LP The NLP4LP benchmark was introduced by AhmadiTeshnizi et al. (2024) for evaluating the ability of large language models to translate natural language operations research problems into solver-ready code and mathematical formulations. It consists of 269 human-authored LP and MILP problems covering classical operations research domains such as scheduling, knapsack allocation, and production planning. In our work, rather than using the original release directly, we adopt the cleaned version provided by Xiao et al. After data cleaning, we use 178 instances in our experiments. 

COMPLEXOR The ComplexOR dataset was introduced by Xiao et al. (2023) as a benchmark for evaluating large language models on challenging operations research modeling tasks. It consists of complex optimization problems drawn from advanced OR case studies and difficult problem classes, such as multi-step lot-sizing, intricate scheduling, and supply chain design. These instances are primarily large-scale or conceptually complex mixed-integer linear programming problems that require multi-step reasoning. In our work, we use 18 instances from this dataset in our experiments. 

INDUSTRYOR The IndustryOR dataset was introduced by Tang et al. (2024) as a benchmark for evaluating large language models on real-world operations research problems. It consists of 100 optimization instances drawn from practical domains such as manufacturing, logistics, finance, and energy. The dataset covers multiple problem categories, including linear, integer, mixed-integer, nonlinear, and other types. In our work, rather than using the original release directly, we adopt the cleaned version provided by Xiao et al. After data cleaning, we use 42 instances in our experiments. 

# B DETAILED PROBLEM DESCRIPTIONS FOR ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES 

This appendix provides complete descriptions of the instances used in the crossover and mutation illustration (Figure 2) as well as additional examples generated by different crossover operations. 

Problem A: Production Scheduling Natural language description. A factory has 50 machine hours available. Two products can be manufactured: • Product 1 requires 2 hours per unit and yields a profit of 5 per unit. • Product 2 requires 1 hour per unit and yields a profit of 3 per unit. Both products can be produced in any non-negative integer quantity. The objective is to maximize total profit. 

Mathematical formulation. 

max 5x1 + 3 x2

s.t. 2x1 + x2 ≤ 50 ,x1, x 2 ≥ 0, integer .

13 Preprint 

Problem B: Knapsack Natural language description. A knapsack has a capacity of 100. Two items are available: • Item 1 weighs 20 and has value 40. • Item 2 weighs 25 and has value 60. Each item can be selected at most once (0-1 decision). The objective is to maximize total value. 

Mathematical formulation. 

max 40 y1 + 60 y2

s.t. 20 y1 + 25 y2 ≤ 100 ,y1, y 2 ∈ { 0, 1}.

Problem C: Hybrid after Crossover Natural language description. This instance is generated by combining the constraint subgraphs of Problem A and Problem B. It inherits both constraints: the machine - hour limit from A and the knapsack capacity from B. The variables and objective coefficients are the union of those from A and B. In concrete terms, the factory has 50 machine hours and 100 units of raw material. Two integer products are available: • Product 1 requires 2 hours and yields a profit of 5. • Product 2 requires 1 hour and yields a profit of 3. Two binary tasks are available: • Task 1 consumes 20 units of material and gives a reward of 40. • Task 2 consumes 25 units of material and gives a reward of 60. Total profit is the sum of product profits and task rewards. The goal is to maximize total profit. 

Mathematical formulation. 

max 5x1 + 3 x2 + 40 y1 + 60 y2

s.t. 2x1 + x2 ≤ 50 ,

20 y1 + 25 y2 ≤ 100 ,x1, x 2 ≥ 0, integer ,y1, y 2 ∈ { 0, 1}.

Problem C’: Mutation of Problem C Natural language description. Problem C’ is derived from Problem C by a parameter mutation: the raw material capacity is reduced from 100 to 90. All other aspects (variables, constraints, objective coefficients) remain unchanged. 

Mathematical formulation. 

max 5x1 + 3 x2 + 40 y1 + 60 y2

s.t. 2x1 + x2 ≤ 50 ,

20 y1 + 25 y2 ≤ 90 ,x1, x 2 ≥ 0, integer ,y1, y 2 ∈ { 0, 1}.

More diverse instances via different crossover operations. Beyond the basic crossover shown in Problem C (combining entire constraint subgraphs), our framework supports other crossover variants that produce even more diverse structures. We illustrate two such variants below: Problem D demonstrates a simple exchange of constraint subgraphs between parent classes, while Problem E shows a more sophisticated crossover that creates a novel mixed constraint. 

Problem D: Another Crossover Example Natural language description. This instance is generated by a different crossover operation: we exchange the entire constraint subgraph of Problem A with that of Problem B. The resulting offspring retains the variables and objective coefficients from A but adopts the constraint from B. In practical terms, the factory now has 100 units of raw material. Two integer products are available: • Product 1 consumes 20 units of raw material and yields a profit of 5 per unit. • Product 2 consumes 25 units of raw material and yields a profit of 3 per unit. 

14 Preprint 

Both products can be produced in any non-negative integer quantity. The objective is to maximize total profit. 

Mathematical formulation. 

max 5x1 + 3 x2

s.t. 20 x1 + 25 x2 ≤ 100 ,x1, x 2 ≥ 0, integer .

Discussion. This operation produces a structurally distinct instance: a production scheduling problem transformed into a knapsack with integer items. It demonstrates the flexibility of our crossover to exchange subgraphs between different problem classes. 

Problem E: Complex Crossover with a Novel Mixed Constraint Parent descriptions (same as A and B). We use the same parents A and B as above. 

Crossover operation. We perform a three-step crossover: 1. Inherit the machine-hour constraint from Parent A. 2. Inherit the knapsack capacity constraint from Parent B. 3. Create a new constraint by combining coefficients from both parents: take the coefficient of x1 from Parent A (2) and the coefficient of y1 from Parent B (20), and form the inequality 2x1 + 20 y1 ≤ 30 ,where the right - hand side is randomly generated (30). This new constraint couples an integer variable and a binary variable. The objective is the sum of both parents’ objectives. 

Resulting Problem E: Multi - Constraint Hybrid. The offspring contains three constraints and a mix of integer and binary variables. 

Natural language description. A factory has three independent resource limits: • Machine hours: 50 hours available. Two integer products can be produced: Product 1 requires 2 hours and yields a profit of 5 per unit; Product 2 requires 1 hour and yields a profit of 3 per unit. • Raw material: 100 units available. Two binary tasks can be selected: Task 1 consumes 20 units of material and gives a reward of 40; Task 2 consumes 25 units of material and gives a reward of 60. • Catalyst constraint (mixed coupling): Producing Product 1 consumes a rare catalyst (2 units per product); activating Task 1 (e.g., starting an auxiliary reactor) consumes 20 units of the same catalyst. The daily supply of catalyst is limited to 30 units. Hence, the production of Product 1 and the activation of Task 1 must satisfy 2x1 + 20 y1 ≤ 30 .The goal is to maximize total profit, which is the sum of product profits and task rewards. 

Mathematical formulation. 

max 5x1 + 3 x2 + 40 y1 + 60 y2

s.t. 2x1 + x2 ≤ 50 ,

20 y1 + 25 y2 ≤ 100 ,

2x1 + 20 y1 ≤ 30 ,x1, x 2 ≥ 0, integer ,y1, y 2 ∈ { 0, 1}.

Discussion. This example demonstrates a highly flexible crossover that not only inherits complete constraints from parents but also creates entirely new constraints by mixing coefficients and variable types. The resulting instance has a richer structure (three constraints, mixed variable domains, a coupling between an integer and a binary variable) that would be impossible to obtain by simple parameter perturbation or by merely concatenating parent constraints. Such complex crossovers are crucial for generating structurally diverse training data, enabling the model to learn intricate trade -offs between different resource types and decision variables. Our framework supports this kind of compositional crossover by allowing arbitrary compatible subgraphs (including partial coefficient vectors) to be exchanged or combined. 

# C DETAILS OF IMPLEMENTATION 

C.1 SFT & RL 

For supervised fine-tuning (SFT), we use the L LAMA FACTORY framework Zheng et al. (2024) with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4 for 3–5 epochs. We employ LoRA with rank 32 , alpha 64 , and dropout 0.05 . The warm-up 

15 Preprint 

Figure 4: Accuracy trajectory of RL-only. The relative improvement of current iteration over the previous one is demonstrated on the corresponding bar. 

Figure 5: Accuracy trajectory of SFT-only. The relative improvement of current iteration over the previous one is demonstrated on the corresponding bar. 

ratio is set to 0.1, and the optimizer is adamw_8bit . Although some hyperparameters vary slightly across experiments, the overall setup remains similar. For reinforcement learning (RL), we use the GRPOT RAINER 

implementation from the TRL library von Werra et al. (2020). Instead of full-parameter updates, we optimize LoRA adapters with the same LoRA hyperparameters as in SFT. We set the number of candidate generations per prompt to 4, the sampling temperature to 0.7, the number of training epochs to 3, and the learning rate to 

5 × 10 −6.

C.2 GENETIC ALGORITHM 

The weights in fitness function are set to β = 0 .3, γ = 0 .3, and δ follows a linear warm-up schedule from 

0 to 0.7 over the first 30% of generations (i.e., δ increases linearly during the warm-up phase and remains at 

0.7 thereafter). The GA uses a population size of max(30 , 2Ntarget ), runs for 10 generations with tournament selection ( k = 3 ), crossover rate 0.8, mutation rate 0.5, per-coefficient mutation probability 0.10 with Gaussian noise scale 0.12 , size mutation probability 0.20 , and elite ratio 15% . Feasibility is verified by Gurobi with a time limit of 300 s and MIP gap 0.01 .

Cross-group crossover. Group pairs are selected for crossover only when their compatibility score s =0.40 svtype + 0 .20 sdensity + 0 .25 ssize + 0 .15 ssense ≥ 0.60 , where the four terms measure cosine similarity of variable-type distributions, constraint-matrix density difference, relative size difference, and optimization-

16 Preprint 

direction consistency, respectively. The operator exchanges contiguous blocks of constraint rows at a random split point r ∈ [⌈n/ 4⌉, ⌊3n/ 4⌋]: rows before r come from one parent and rows after from the other, each carrying its full coefficient vector and bounds. Variable columns are independently inherited per column from a randomly chosen parent, ensuring no orphaned variables. If the offspring is infeasible, a repair step preserves the cross-group constraint matrix A and resets bl, b u around a randomly sampled feasible point x∗ to restore feasibility. 

C.3 XGB OOST 

An XGBoost classifier was trained to predict whether the solution outcome for each generated optimization instance was correct. The input representation comprised graph-derived descriptors computed from the opti-mization model structure, including statistics of the constraint matrix, objective vector, right-hand-side bounds, variable bounds, variable types, and instance-level metadata. In total, 103 features were constructed, as sum-marized in Table 3. To improve robustness and reduce redundancy, feature selection was performed in three steps. First, features with zero variance were removed. Next, among feature pairs with absolute correlation greater than 0.95, the feature with lower mutual information with the target label was pruned. Finally, the top 20 features ranked by mutual information were retained. The final XGBoost configuration used 500 boosting rounds, a maximum tree depth of 4, and a learning rate of 0.05. The subsample ratio and column sampling ratio per tree were set to 0.8 and 0.6, respectively. In addition, the minimum child weight was set to 10, γ was set to 1.0, the L1 regularization coefficient was 1.0, and the L2 regularization coefficient was 5.0. The classifier was trained with the binary:logistic objective and evaluated primarily using the AUC metric. 

Feature Name Description Type A Problem Dimensions 

n_vars Number of decision variables ( nvars ) Count 

n_cons Number of constraints ( ncons ) Count 

var_con_ratio Ratio of variables to constraints ( nvars /n cons ) Ratio 

log_size Logarithm of total problem size: log(1 + nvars × ncons ) Cont. 

B Variable Type Composition 

prop_continuous Proportion of continuous ( C) variables Ratio 

prop_binary Proportion of binary ( B) variables Ratio 

prop_integer Proportion of general integer ( I) variables Ratio 

is_pure_lp Binary indicator: problem is a pure LP (no integer or binary variables) Binary 

has_integer Binary indicator: problem contains at least one integer or binary variable Binary 

C Constraint Type 

prop_equality Proportion of equality constraints ( bl ≈ bu) Ratio 

D Sparsity and Non-zero Structure 

sparsity Sparsity of constraint matrix A: proportion of zero entries Ratio 

avg_nnz_per_row Mean number of non-zero entries per constraint row Cont. 

std_nnz_row Standard deviation of non-zero counts per row Cont. 

std_nnz_col Standard deviation of non-zero counts per column Cont. 

E Coefficient Statistics (Matrix A)

log_max_coeff log(1 + max |Aij |) for non-zero entries Cont. 

coeff_cv Coefficient of variation of non-zero coefficients in A:

σ/ (μ + ϵ)

Cont. 

prop_unit_coeff Proportion of non-zero entries equal to ±1 Ratio 

has_frac_coeff Binary indicator: at least one fractional (non-integer) coef-ficient exists in A

Binary 

coeff_range_log Log-scale coefficient range in A:

log(1 + max |aij |/(min |aij | + ϵ)) 

Cont. 

F Objective Coefficient Statistics 

prop_zero_obj Proportion of zero entries in objective vector c Ratio 

log_max_obj log(1 + max |cj |) for non-zero objective coefficients Cont. 

obj_cv Coefficient of variation of non-zero objective coefficients Cont. 

G Sign Structure 

prop_neg_coeff Proportion of negative entries in A Ratio 

prop_mixed_sign_rows Proportion of constraint rows with both positive and nega-tive coefficients Ratio 

Continued on next page. . . 

17 Preprint 

Feature Name Description Type H Variable Bounds 

prop_finite_ub Proportion of variables with a finite upper bound Ratio 

avg_bound_width Mean width of finite variable bound intervals: (uj − lj )

for bounded variables Cont. 

prop_fixed_vars Proportion of variables fixed at a single value ( lj = uj ) Ratio 

I Right-Hand Side Statistics 

log_max_rhs log(1 + max |b|) over all finite RHS values Cont. 

rhs_cv Coefficient of variation of finite RHS values Cont. 

J Graph-Theoretic Properties 

graph_density Density of the bipartite constraint–variable graph: nnz /(ncons × nvars )

Ratio 

degree_std Standard deviation of node degrees in the bipartite graph Cont. 

degree_skewness Skewness of the node degree distribution Cont. 

K Objective–Constraint Geometric Similarity 

obj_cons_max_cos Maximum absolute cosine similarity between c and any constraint row of A

Cont. 

obj_cons_mean_cos Mean cosine similarity between c and constraint rows of 

A

Cont. 

obj_cons_std_cos Standard deviation of cosine similarities between c and constraint rows Cont. 

L Linear-Algebraic Properties 

rank_ratio Numerical rank ratio of A:rank (A)/ min( ncons , n vars )

Ratio 

row_norm_cv Coefficient of variation of Euclidean row norms of A Cont. 

prop_tight_cons Proportion of constraints with a narrow feasible activity range (tightness ratio < 0.1)Ratio 

mean_coupling Mean number of shared variables between all pairs of constraints (off-diagonal of AA ⊤)Cont. 

M Connectivity 

n_components Number of connected components in the bipartite constraint–variable graph Count 

is_connected Binary indicator: the bipartite graph is connected (single component) Binary 

N NLP Replacement: Problem Scale Proxies 

graph_size Total number of entries in A: ncons × nvars Count 

graph_nnz Total number of non-zero entries in A Count 

graph_n_active_cons Number of constraints with at least one non-zero coeffi-cient Count 

graph_median_coeff Median absolute value of non-zero entries in A Cont. 

graph_mean_nnz_per_col Mean number of non-zero entries per variable column Cont. 

graph_unique_coeff_ratio Ratio of distinct non-zero values to total non-zeros in A Ratio 

O NLP Replacement: RHS Numerical Properties 

graph_finite_rhs_count Total count of finite values among all bl and bu bounds Count 

graph_max_finite_abs Maximum absolute value across all finite model parame-ters ( A, c, bl, bu, lb , ub )Cont. 

graph_has_frac_rhs Binary indicator: at least one fractional RHS value exists Binary 

graph_has_neg_rhs Binary indicator: at least one negative RHS value exists Binary 

graph_distinct_rhs Number of distinct RHS values across all bounds Count 

graph_rhs_range Range of RHS values: max( b) − min( b) over all finite bounds Cont. 

P NLP Replacement: Constraint and Variable Type Counts 

graph_int_var_count Number of general integer ( I) variables Count 

graph_bin_var_count Number of binary ( B) variables Count 

graph_is_min Binary indicator: the objective is a minimization Binary 

graph_is_max Binary indicator: the objective is a maximization Binary 

graph_leq_cons_count Number of ≤ constraints (finite bu, infinite bl) Count 

graph_geq_cons_count Number of ≥ constraints (finite bl, infinite bu) Count 

graph_eq_cons_count Number of equality constraints ( bl ≈ bu) Count 

Continued on next page. . . 

18 Preprint 

Feature Name Description Type 

graph_zero_row_count Number of all-zero rows in A (structurally redundant con-straints) Count 

graph_mixed_sign_count Number of constraints containing both positive and nega-tive coefficients Count 

graph_linking_pair_count Number of constraints with exactly 2 non-zero entries (binary linking constraints) Count 

graph_frac_coeff_count Number of fractional (non-integer) coefficients in A Count 

graph_obj_range_ratio Ratio of maximum to minimum absolute objective coeffi-cient: max |cj |/(min |cj | + ϵ)

Cont. 

graph_unit_row_count Number of constraint rows whose non-zero entries are all 

±1

Count 

graph_range_cons_count Number of range constraints with both finite and distinct 

bl and bu (|bu − bl| ≥ ϵ)Count 

graph_obj_density Proportion of non-zero entries in objective vector c Ratio 

graph_singleton_count Number of constraints with exactly 1 non-zero entry (single-variable constraints) Count 

graph_dense_row_count Number of fully-dense rows in A (all nvars variables ap-pear) Count 

Q NLP Replacement: Constraint Structural Diversity 

graph_cons_diversity Number of distinct non-zero-count patterns (cardinalities) among constraint rows Count 

R NLP Replacement: Code-Level Structural Proxies 

graph_total_coeff_sum Sum of absolute values of all entries in A: P 

> i,j

|aij | Cont. 

graph_n_rows Number of constraint rows in the model Count 

graph_n_cols Number of variable columns in the model Count 

graph_bounded_cons_count Number of constraints bounded on at least one side (finite 

bl or bu)Count 

graph_has_identical_rows Binary indicator: at least two rows of A share an identical sign pattern Binary 

graph_max_col_nnz Maximum number of non-zero entries in any single vari-able column Count 

graph_has_bigM Binary indicator: Big-M pattern detected (a coefficient exceeds 50 × the median non-zero value) Binary 

graph_vtype_diversity Number of distinct variable types present ( C, I, B) Count 

graph_obj_nnz_count Number of non-zero entries in objective vector c Count 

graph_all_finite_ub Binary indicator: all variables have finite upper bounds Binary 

graph_var_group_count Number of distinct variable subsets (support sets) appear-ing across constraint rows Count 

graph_block_mixing_ratio Proportion of constraints whose non-zeros span both the left and right halves of the variable index set Ratio 

graph_n_var_names Number of named decision variables in the model Count 

graph_n_con_names Number of named constraints in the model Count 

graph_avg_row_abs_sum Mean sum of absolute coefficients per constraint row: 

P 

> j

|aij |

Cont. 

graph_max_var_participation Maximum number of constraints in which any single vari-able appears Count 

graph_total_distinct_values Total number of distinct numeric values across A, c, bl,

bu, lb , ub 

Count 

S NLP Replacement: Internal Consistency Ratios 

graph_rhs_to_cons_ratio Ratio of finite RHS count to number of constraints Ratio 

graph_rhs_coeff_mag_ratio Ratio of mean absolute RHS to mean absolute coefficient in A

Cont. 

graph_nnz_to_cons_ratio Ratio of total non-zeros in A to number of constraints Cont. 

graph_active_cons_ratio Proportion of constraints with at least one non-zero coeffi-cient Ratio 

graph_obj_A_value_overlap Fraction of distinct objective coefficient values that also appear as entries in A

Ratio 

graph_A_only_value_count Number of distinct numeric values appearing in A but not in c

Count 

graph_c_only_value_count Number of distinct numeric values appearing in c but not in A

Count 

Continued on next page. . . 

19 Preprint 

Feature Name Description Type 

graph_col_jaccard Mean Jaccard similarity of constraint participation sets over sampled pairs of variable columns Ratio 

graph_complexity_score Composite complexity score: ncons × diversity +

finite RHS count Cont. 

graph_structural_score Structural complexity score: bounded constraints +nvars +2 · 1[mixed ] + group count Cont. 

graph_complexity_diff Difference between composite and structural complexity: graph_complexity_score −

graph_structural_score 

Cont. 

T Instance Metadata 

problem_type_enc Label-encoded integer representing the problem category (e.g. LP, MIP, MIQP) Int. 

inst_n_vars Number of variables parsed from the instance identifier Count 

inst_n_cons Number of constraints parsed from the instance identifier Count 

C.4 PROMPT TEMPLATES 

C.4.1 BASELINE PROMPT 

Baseline Prompt Template for optimization modeling 

Below is an operations research question. Build a mathematical model and corresponding python code using `gurobipy ` that appropriately addresses the question. # Question: {question} # Response: 

C.4.2 REVERSE DATA GENERATE PROMPT 

Prompt for Cross-Group Example Generation 

As an Operations Research Expert, your task is to create a SINGLE coherent optimization problem description that naturally combines two problem types into one unified scenario, with a CLEAR emphasis on one type as the primary framework. ## Primary Problem Type (DOMINANT): <DOM_SUBCLASS> Mathematical Model: <DOM_FORMULA> Example: <DOM_EXAMPLE> ## Secondary Problem Type (supplementary): <MIN_SUBCLASS> Mathematical Model: <MIN_FORMULA> Example: <MIN_EXAMPLE> ## Your Task: 

20 Preprint 

Create ONE natural language description of an optimization problem that: 1. Presents a single, realistic scenario (e.g., a company, alogistics operation, a planning task) 2. Uses <DOM_SUBCLASS> as the PRIMARY framework and core storyline 3. Naturally weaves in <MIN_SUBCLASS> elements as SECONDARY considerations 4. The <DOM_SUBCLASS> aspects should be clearly dominant (roughly 60-70% of the problem), while <MIN_SUBCLASS> provides the remaining enrichment 5. Includes specific numerical parameters (costs, capacities, demands, etc.) to make it concrete 6. Clearly states what needs to be optimized 7. Describes all constraints naturally within the narrative 8. Uses appropriate domain terminology from both fields 9. Does NOT contain any mathematical formulas or variable names For example, if the dominant type is "Knapsack" and secondary is "Bin Packing", you might describe a purchasing manager who primarily needs to select which products to buy within a budget, and additionally must arrange selected products into shipping containers. ## Required Output: Provide ONLY the natural language problem description. No headers, no meta-commentary, no formulas. Just the problem scenario. 

Prompt for Single-Group Reverse Generation 

As an Operations Research Expert, analyze the given LP data and generate a natural language description. Input LP Data: <LP_DATA> Mathematical Model Reference: <FORMULA> Application Domain: <SUBCLASS> Reference Example: <EXAMPLE> ## Required Output: Generate a clear, detailed natural language description of this optimization problem that: - Describes a concrete, realistic scenario in the <SUBCLASS> domain - States all decision variables and what they represent - Specifies the objective (minimize/maximize) and what it means in the scenario - Incorporates ALL constraints naturally within the narrative - Includes ALL numerical parameters (coefficients, bounds, right-hand sides) exactly as they appear in the LP data - Uses appropriate domain terminology - Does NOT include any mathematical formulas, variable names like x0/x1, or LP file content CRITICAL: Every numerical value in the LP data must appear somewhere in your description. Do not omit or approximate any parameter. 

21 Preprint 

Provide ONLY the natural language description, nothing else. 

Prompt for Dominant Cross-Group Generation 

As an Operations Research Expert, analyze the given LP data and generate a natural language description. This optimization problem primarily belongs to "<DOM_SUBCLASS>" (approx. <DOM_RATIO>\%), with additional constraints from "<MIN_SUBCLASS>" (approx. <MIN_RATIO>\%). Input LP Data: <LP_DATA> Primary Mathematical Model Reference (<DOM_SUBCLASS>): <DOM_FORMULA> Cross-Domain Reference Example (showing how <DOM_SUBCLASS> and <MIN_SUBCLASS> can be combined in one scenario): <CROSS_EXAMPLE> ## Required Output: Following the style of the cross-domain reference example above, generate a natural language description that: - Frames the problem primarily as a <DOM_SUBCLASS> problem - Naturally incorporates the <MIN_SUBCLASS>-style constraints as part of the same scenario - Describes a concrete, realistic scenario - States all decision variables and what they represent - Specifies the objective (minimize/maximize) clearly - Incorporates ALL constraints naturally within the narrative - Includes ALL numerical parameters (coefficients, bounds, right-hand sides) EXACTLY as they appear in the LP data - Does NOT include any mathematical formulas, variable names like x0/x1, or LP file content CRITICAL: Every numerical value in the LP data must appear somewhere in your description. Do not omit or approximate any parameter. The description must be fully self-contained - a reader should be able to reconstruct the LP formulation from your description alone. Provide ONLY the natural language description, nothing else. 

Prompt for Mixed Cross-Group Generation 

As an Operations Research Expert, analyze the given LP data and generate a natural language description. This optimization problem combines two domains: - Primary: "<DOM_SUBCLASS>" (approx. <DOM_RATIO>\%) - Secondary: "<MIN_SUBCLASS>" (approx. <MIN_RATIO>\%) Input LP Data: <LP_DATA> Primary Mathematical Model Reference (<DOM_SUBCLASS>): 

22 Preprint 

<DOM_FORMULA> Cross-Domain Reference Example (showing how to combine <DOM_SUBCLASS> and <MIN_SUBCLASS> naturally): <CROSS_EXAMPLE> ## Required Output: Using the cross-domain reference example as a style guide, generate a natural language description that: - Creates a unified, realistic scenario combining aspects of both <DOM_SUBCLASS> and <MIN_SUBCLASS> - The primary framing should be from the <DOM_SUBCLASS> perspective - <MIN_SUBCLASS> constraints should be woven in naturally - States all decision variables and what they represent - Specifies the objective clearly - Incorporates ALL constraints within the narrative - Includes ALL numerical parameters EXACTLY as in the LP data - Does NOT include any mathematical formulas, variable names like x0/x1, or LP file content CRITICAL: Every numerical value in the LP data must appear somewhere in your description. Do not omit or approximate any parameter. The description must be fully self-contained - a reader should be able to reconstruct the LP formulation from your description alone. Provide ONLY the natural language description, nothing else. 

Prompt for Fusion Cross-Group Generation 

As an Operations Research Expert, analyze the given LP data and generate a natural language description. This optimization problem equally combines: - "<DOM_SUBCLASS>" (approx. <DOM_RATIO>\%) - "<MIN_SUBCLASS>" (approx. <MIN_RATIO>\%) Input LP Data: <LP_DATA> Cross-Domain Reference Example (demonstrating how <DOM_SUBCLASS> and <MIN_SUBCLASS> merge into one scenario): <CROSS_EXAMPLE> ## Required Output: Using the cross-domain reference example as a style guide, generate a natural language description that: - Creates a single coherent, realistic scenario integrating BOTH <DOM_SUBCLASS> and <MIN_SUBCLASS> equally - Both problem aspects should be equally prominent in the narrative - States all decision variables and what they represent - Specifies the objective clearly - Incorporates ALL constraints within the narrative - Includes ALL numerical parameters EXACTLY as in the LP data - Does NOT include any mathematical formulas, variable names like x0/x1, or LP file content 

23 Preprint 

CRITICAL: Every numerical value in the LP data must appear somewhere in your description. Do not omit or approximate any parameter. The description must be fully self-contained - a reader should be able to reconstruct the LP formulation from your description alone. Provide ONLY the natural language description, nothing else. 

Prompt for Self-Critique 

As an Operations Research Expert, rigorously verify if the generated problem description accurately and completely represents the LP data. Input LP Data: <LP_DATA> Generated Problem Description: <DESCRIPTION> ## Verification Checklist: 1. Count decision variables in LP data vs description - do they match? 2. For EACH variable: are bounds (lower, upper) correctly stated? 3. For EACH variable: is the type (integer, binary, continuous) correctly described? 4. Is the objective function direction (min/max) correct? 5. For EACH objective coefficient: does the description include the exact value? 6. Count constraints in LP data vs description - do they match? 7. For EACH constraint: are ALL coefficients exactly correct? 8. For EACH constraint: are the right-hand side values (bounds) exactly correct? 9. Are there any numerical values in the LP data that are missing from the description? 10. Are there any numerical values in the description that do NOT appear in the LP data? ## Required Output: If ALL checks pass perfectly: "Complete Instance" If ANY discrepancy exists: "Incomplete Instance: [List EVERY specific discrepancy with exact values from LP data that are wrong or missing]" 

Prompt for Self-Refinement 

As an Operations Research Expert, fix the problem description based on the criticism. Criticism: <CRITICISM> If the criticism says "Complete Instance", output exactly: "Nothing need to refine" 

24 Preprint 

Otherwise, fix ALL identified issues: LP Data (ground truth): <LP_DATA> Scenario Context: <SCENARIO_CONTEXT> Current Description (contains errors): <INITIAL_DESCRIPTION> ## Required Output: If criticism is "Complete Instance": Output "Nothing need to refine" Otherwise, generate a CORRECTED description that: - Fixes every single discrepancy identified in the criticism - Maintains the same narrative style and scenario - Includes ALL numerical parameters EXACTLY as in the LP data - Does NOT include any mathematical formulas or LP file content - Is a complete, standalone description (not a patch or diff) Output ONLY the corrected natural language description, nothing else. 

# D SUPPLEMENTARY TECHNICAL DETAILS 

D.1 FORMAL DEFINITION OF GRAPH EDIT DISTANCE (GED) AND ITS APPLICATION IN THIS 

PAPER 

Graph Edit Distance (GED) is a classic measure of structural dissimilarity between two graphs (Gao et al., 2010; Gasse et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2023). For two graphs G1 = ( V1, E 1) and G2 = ( V2, E 2), GED is defined as the minimum cost of a sequence of edit operations (insertion, deletion, and substitution of nodes and edges) that transforms G1 into G2. Its mathematical definition is: 

GED( G1, G 2) = min  

> (o1,...,o k)∈P (G1,G 2)
> k

X

> i=1

c(oi),

where c(oi) is the cost of operation oi, and P(G1, G 2) is the set of all valid sequences of operations. In this paper, we adopt unit costs (all operations have cost 1) and compute GED efficiently using a bipartite matching approximation algorithm (Blumenthal et al., 2020). In Section 3.2, GED is used to compute the diversity term ˜fdiv (G), i.e., the normalized average GED between the current individual and other individuals in the population. A larger GED indicates a more significant structural difference, thereby encouraging the evolution to explore novel graph structures. This design ensures structural diversity of the population, providing a foundation for subsequent difficulty selection and weakness guidance. 

D.2 T-SNE D IMENSIONALITY REDUCTION AND ITS APPLICATION IN WEAKNESS ANALYSIS 

Brief Introduction to t-SNE t-SNE is a nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique that preserves local structure by minimizing the KL divergence between probability distributions in the high-dimensional and low-dimensional spaces (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008). It defines high-dimensional similarities pij and low-dimensional similarities qij and optimizes the low-dimensional coordinates via gradient descent. 

Application in Weakness Analysis We use t-SNE to visualize the feature vectors ϕ(G) to validate the effectiveness of the extracted features. The procedure is as follows: 1. Select correctly and incorrectly solved instances from the validation set Vval .2. Extract the d-dimensional feature vector ϕ(G) for each instance (see Section 3.3 for details). 3. Apply t-SNE to project the features into two dimensions for visualization. 

25 Preprint 

Figure 6: An Example of t-SNE Feature Visualization 

In the resulting plot, correctly and incorrectly solved instances are marked with different colors. Figure 6 shows one representative example from a particular run. If the two classes exhibit visible clustering patterns, this provides visual evidence that the feature vector ϕ(G) captures structural information relevant to model errors. For the example shown in Figure 6, the corresponding classifier achieves an AUC of 0.8836. 

26