Title: Benchmarking Language Models for Statistical Problem Formulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.01982v1

Published Time: Thu, 03 Sep 2026 00:23:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## Benchmarking Language Models for Statistical Problem Formulation 

Chen Wang 1*, Junzhe Zhao 1*, Xin Cong 1†, Wanlu Deng 1, Ke Deng 11 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Tsinghua University 

> {wangchen_23, zhaojz26}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {congxin1995, wanludeng, kdeng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) are increas-ingly used as assistants for statistical and data science work, yet existing evaluations largely assume the analysis target is already specified. In practice, users arrive with informal goals and heterogeneous data, leaving the model to decide what statistical task is implied and which data are relevant. We first formalize this upstream step as Statistical Problem Formulation and decompose it into two subtasks: (1) Statistical Problem Classification and (2) Variable Identification & Role Assignment. We then introduce S TAT -FORM BENCH , a benchmark built from five cross-domain statistics textbooks and a data science case library, covering diverse problem types, data representations, and scenario styles. It contains 1,013 samples spanning 20 coarse-grained and 85 fine-grained statistical problem categories. Across 14 open- and closed-source LLMs, the best zero-shot models reach only 72.0 fine-grained classification accuracy and 63.2 variable set overlap. No model performs consistently best across the two subtasks, while enhanced prompting strategies yield only limited or inconsistent gains. We release the benchmark data on Hugging Face at https://huggingface.co/ datasets/THU-CongLab/StatFormBench 

and the evaluation code on GitHub at https:// github.com/THU-CongLab/StatFormBench .

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly expected to serve as general-purpose assistants for data science and statistical analysis work, helping users inspect datasets, choose analyses, and answer questions grounded in data (Huang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025). Much of this work assumes that the analysis target has already   

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author.

been made explicit, for example by specifying a prediction task, a hypothesis test, or a modeling objective (Lu et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025). In practice, how-ever, users often begin with informal goals rather than formal analysis specifications. As illustrated in Figure 1, even a simple practical request may re-quire the model to distinguish the intended hypoth-esis test from a superficially plausible prediction task. It also needs to determine which data objects are required for that test, rather than treating all available fields as relevant. These implicit choices determine whether the subsequent analysis is statis-tically valid. We refer to this upstream specification step as statistical problem formulation. We define Statistical Problem Formulation as the task of mapping an informal, natural-language analysis request to (i) the type of statistical problem it implies and (ii) the relevant data objects together with their analytical roles. These two components correspond to two closely connected decisions. The first, Statistical Problem Classification , deter-mines what type of statistical task a scenario calls for, such as comparing group means, examining associations between variables, or predicting future outcomes. The second, Variable Identification and Role Assignment , determines which data ob-jects are relevant to the task and what analytical role each object plays, such as an independent vari-able or a dependent variable. Once these decisions have been made, the subsequent choice of statistical methods becomes more constrained. By contrast, formulation itself often depends on interpreting the user’s intent, the available data, and the surround-ing domain context. Whether LLMs can reliably perform this step remains largely unexplored. Recent benchmarks have examined LLMs in statistics and data science, covering statistical knowledge and reasoning (Lu et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2024; Su et al., 2025) as well as data science execu-tion (Huang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025; Chen arXiv:2609.01982v1 [cs.AI] 2 Sep 2026 Background:    

> A hospital uses Drug A for post-surgical pain management. Historical records from 85
> patients show a mean pain reduction of 3.2 points on a 10-point scale ( SD = 2.1 ). The hospital recently piloted Drug B on 15 patients.

Question: 

> Should we continue using Drug A or switch to Drug B?

Drug B Pilot Results 

Incorrect Output ✗ Correct Output ✓

Category: Prediction → Continuous Value Prediction ✗

Variables: Category: Hypothesis Testing → Mean Test ✓

Variables: 

Claude GPT Gemini DeepSeek Qwen ···                        

> Age Pain red.
> 45 5.8 38 7.1
> ··· ···
> Variable Value Cls Role
> Age [45, 38, ...] num Xover-ext. Pain red. [5.8, 7.1, ...] num Yrole err.
> Variable Value Cls Role Desc.
> DrugA_red {n=85, μ=3.2, σ=2.1} num XY Historical DrugB_red [5.8, 7.1, ...] num XY Pilot

Figure 1: Overview of statistical problem formulation. Given a scenario with heterogeneous data, the model must classify the statistical problem type and extract the relevant variables with their roles. 

et al., 2025). These studies provide useful evidence about whether LLMs can reason with statistical concepts or carry out specified analyses, but they generally assume that the analysis target is already given or strongly implied. As a result, they do not directly test whether a model can first formulate the statistical task from an informal real-world request. Evaluating this capability is challenging because formulation differs from standard question answer-ing or task execution in several ways. First, the input is often not written in statistical language: users may describe practical goals with ambigu-ity, domain-specific wording, and distracting con-textual details. Second, the relevant data may be represented in heterogeneous forms, including raw tabular variables, summary statistics such as means and standard deviations, contingency tables, and other structured or semi-structured objects. Third, the target label space is broad and weakly delimited. Deciding whether a scenario calls for comparison, association analysis, prediction, reliability assess-ment, or another statistical task requires jointly interpreting the user’s objective, the data structure, and the domain context. The same problem-level understanding is also needed to separate relevant variables from incidental information and to assign their analytical roles. To this end, we introduce S TAT FORM BENCH ,a benchmark for statistical problem formulation in realistic, unstructured settings. STAT FORM -BENCH operationalizes formulation through two tasks aligned with the decisions above. Statistical Problem Classification asks a model to identify the statistical problem type expressed by a scenario, and Variable Identification & Role Assignment 

asks it to identify the data objects relevant to the task and assign their analytical roles. The bench-mark is constructed from statistics textbook exer-cises across applied domains and a data science case library reflecting diverse business scenarios, allowing us to cover both controlled pedagogical problems and more open-ended real-world analysis requests. Each sample is built through a unified pipeline that extracts raw triples of question, an-swer, and data, splits multi-part problems into indi-vidual instances, filters for quality, and annotates problem types and variable roles. The problem de-scriptions are then rewritten into realistic scenario-style language. We evaluate 14 open-source and proprietary LLMs. The best zero-shot fine-grained classification accuracy is 72.0, while the highest variable set overlap is 63.2, with the two results achieved by different models. Fine-grained analy-sis further shows that performance varies substan-tially across problem categories and data sources, while standard prompting strategies yield limited and inconsistent gains. Our contributions are as follows: (1) we are the first to study statistical problem formulation as an evaluation problem for LLMs, decomposing it into statistical problem classification and variable iden-tification & role assignment; (2) we construct the STAT FORM BENCH benchmark covering diverse statistical problem types, data representations, and scenario styles, with samples derived from both textbooks and real-world data science cases; (3) we evaluate 14 open-source and proprietary LLMs, showing that no model performs consistently best across formulation tasks and that current models still struggle to map informal requests to precise statistical formulations regardless of the prompting strategy used. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 LLMs for Statistics and Data Science 

Recent benchmarks evaluate LLMs for statistics and data science mainly along two lines. Both are closely related to our setting, but these studies generally assume that the analytical goal is already specified or implied. 

Statistical knowledge and reasoning. The first line studies whether LLMs can reason with statisti-cal concepts once the analytical goal is explicit or strongly implied. StatQA (Zhu et al., 2024) eval-uates method applicability and variable selection for pre-formulated questions over structured tables, StatEval (Lu et al., 2026) extends this direction to foundational exercises and research-level proof tasks, and QRData (Liu et al., 2024) and Climate-Viz (Su et al., 2025) examine statistical or causal reasoning over data sheets and scientific charts. These benchmarks assess statistical competence in settings where the target analytical goal is already defined, whereas we focus on inferring the statisti-cal problem itself and identifying the data objects required for solving it. 

Data science execution. The second line eval-uates LLMs as executors of specified analytical tasks. DA-Code (Huang et al., 2024) and DataS-ciBench (Zhang et al., 2025) focus on code gener-ation for data preprocessing, analysis, and model-ing, while ScienceAgentBench (Chen et al., 2025), LMR-Bench (Yan et al., 2025), DSBench (Jing et al., 2025), and BLADE (Gu et al., 2024) extend evaluation to data-driven science, ML research re-production, and realistic data science workflows. These works increasingly consider intermediate de-cisions, but they still largely assume that research questions or analytical objectives have been given. 

2.2 LLMs for Problem Formulation Optimization modeling. Another line of work evaluates whether LLMs can map natural-language descriptions to formal problem representations. Op-timization modeling is the most developed exam-ple. NL4Opt (Ramamonjison et al., 2022) and subsequent benchmarks such as OptiMUS (Ahma-diTeshnizi et al., 2024), Chain-of-Experts (Xiao et al., 2024), ORLM (Huang et al., 2025), LL-MOPT (Jiang et al., 2025), and OptiBench (Yang et al., 2025) treat formulation as an explicit target rather than a hidden precursor to solving. 

Mathematical and domain-specific formulation. 

Related benchmarks extend this formulation per-spective to broader domains. ModelingAgent (Qian et al., 2025) and MM-Agent (Liu et al., 2025) study mathematical modeling from competition prob-lems, MedCalc-Bench (Khandekar et al., 2024) and MedRaC (Wang et al., 2025) evaluate clinical calcu-lation through formula selection, entity extraction, and computation, and DiscoveryBench (Majumder et al., 2025) evaluates data-driven hypothesis gen-eration in scientific discovery through context, vari-ables, and relationships. Together, these studies show the value of evaluating intermediate abstrac-tions rather than only final answers. Statistical problem formulation shares this map-ping challenge, but is less anchored by a fixed schema. Unlike optimization formulation, which largely amounts to instantiating a fixed template of elements such as objectives and constraints, sta-tistical formulation must infer the analytical ques-tion from domain-specific descriptions and select from a large, heterogeneous, and weakly delimited space of problem types. It must also identify di-verse data objects, ranging from raw variables to grouped summaries and contingency tables. To our knowledge, no existing benchmark systematically evaluates this upstream formulation ability. 

3 Task Formulation 

We decompose statistical problem formulation into two tasks defined over an input triple (B, Q, D ),where B describes the practical background, Q

states the user request, and D refers to data. D

varies in both form and content (e.g., tables, textual descriptions, separate files, etc.). In content, it ranges from raw observations to summary statistics and contingency tables. Samples      

> Background Question Data Label
> Data Sources
> Statistics Textbooks Case Library Sample Extraction Quality Filtering Annotation Scenario Rewriting Question Splitting

Figure 2: Overview of our S TAT FORM BENCH benchmark construction pipeline. 

3.1 Task 1: Statistical Problem Classification 

Given (B, Q, D ), the task is to predict      

> c= ( cCG , c FG ),cCG ∈ C CG , c FG ∈ C FG ,(1)

where c denotes the statistical problem type. The label space is a two-level hierarchy. CCG captures coarse analytical intent, such as descriptive statis-tics, classification and prediction, and hypothesis testing and interval estimation, while CFG subdi-vides each first-level category into specific problem types. We classify the problem type rather than the solving method because the same statistical prob-lem can admit multiple methods, and committing to one method would blur the distinction between problem identification and method selection. 

3.2 Task 2: Variable Identification and Role Assignment 

Given the same input, the task is to produce a set 

V = {v1, . . . , v k} of variables required for solving 

Q, where each variable object is represented as      

> vi= (id i,desc i,value i,role i).(2)

Here id i is a short identifier, typically reusing a name from D. desc i describes its domain meaning, and value i stores the corresponding values from D.The role field specifies how vi participates in solv-ing Q and takes one of four values: predictor ,

response , both , or N/A . The roles predictor and 

response are assigned when the problem implies a directional relationship. The role both is used when variables are related without a required direc-tion, as in correlation analysis, or when a variable plays both directional roles. The role N/A marks variables that are needed but have no directional role, such as identifiers, filter variables, and in-puts to unsupervised analyses. Notably, roles are question-conditional, since the same data may play different roles under different user requests. 

4 Benchmark Construction 

4.1 Data Sources 

We build S TAT FORM BENCH from two complemen-tary sources. The first source consists of worked examples and exercises from five statistics text-books spanning diverse applied domains, includ-ing public health (Gerstman, 2007), business and economics (McClave et al., 2013), reliability anal-ysis (Pham, 2022), environmental science (Cook and Wheater, 2000), and clinical research (Altman, 1991). These samples provide broad coverage of canonical statistical problem types and usually in-clude compact data in text or inline tables. The second source is a case-based data science library from GouXiongHui (GouXiongHui Org.), where each case centers on a substantive analytical ques-tion, accompanied by an analysis report, struc-tured datasets, and reference code. These samples provide more open-ended analytical contexts with larger data files in diverse formats. 

4.2 Construction Pipeline 

To enable uniform evaluation, both sources are con-verted into samples of the form (B, Q, D, c, V ),where (B, Q, D ) is the evaluation input, c is the problem-type label, and V is the reference variable set. Figure 2 summarizes the construction pipeline. We describe the main stages below with further details in Appendix A. 

Sample extraction and splitting. Raw materi-als are first parsed into entries (Qo, A o, D ), where the superscript o denotes the original form. Specif-ically, Qo is the original problem statement, Ao

is the original reference answer, and D contains the associated data. Entries with multiple sub-questions are then split into individual samples 

( ˜B, ˜Q, ˜A, D ) by extracting the shared background 

˜B from Qo and pairing each sub-question ˜Q with its answer ˜A.

Quality filtering. We remove samples that are too narrow to test formulation, such as value lookup and pure concept recall, and discard cases with in-complete information, such as questions that de-pend on the answer to a previous problem. 

Initial label construction. Each retained sam-ple is annotated with a category c = ( cCG , c FG )

and a variable set V = {v1, . . . , v k}. Domain ex-DV MC HTAIE CAP DS MCV MI CEOSR TDA AA DDM NC DP MD OTHE       

> 0510 15 20 25 30
> Variable Count
> 050 100 150 200 250 300 350
> Frequency
> Category
> DV: Data Visualization (275) MC: Mathematical Calculation (241) HTAIE: Hypothesis Testing and Interval Estimation (174) CAP: Classification and Prediction (49) DS: Descriptive Statistics (41) MCV: Model Comparison (Variable Selection) (38) MI: Model Interpretation (38) CEOSR: Critical Evaluation of Statistical Results (35) TDA: Text Data Analysis (23) AA: Association Analysis (22) DDM: Data Distribution Modelling (17) NC: Numerical Computation (17) DP: Data Preprocessing (9) MD: Model Diagnosis (7) OTHE: Others (27)

Figure 3: Dataset statistics. Left : Distribution of samples across coarse-grained categories. Right : Distribution of the number of variables per sample. 

perts trained in statistics at the undergraduate and doctoral level first construct an initial taxonomy from standard statistical practice, and the taxon-omy is refined during annotation when new prob-lem types arise. Specifically, the annotator LLM proposes candidate categories, and a domain expert decides whether to adopt or merge them. The fi-nal taxonomy contains |C CG | = 20 first-level and 

|C FG | = 85 second-level categories (Appendix B). Variable labels are grounded in the solving pro-cess of ˜A, so variables mentioned in the scenario but not needed for the solution are excluded. For the textbook subset, Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026a) produces the initial annotations of both c

and V . For the case-library subset, separate GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024) calls produce the initial annotations of c and V . The model-generated la-bels serve only as initial candidates, and every final label is subsequently verified by human reviewers as described in Section 4.3. 

Scenario rewriting. As both sources are peda-gogical in origin, the original ( ˜B, ˜Q) often use instructional or explicitly statistical language and rarely include information beyond what the prob-lem requires. We therefore use GPT-5 to rewrite each problem from the perspective of a domain practitioner without statistical training. The rewrite preserves the analytical intent, numerical values, and named entities, while removing direct cues about the target statistical problem category, intro-ducing minor contextual details not directly rele-vant to the solution, and rephrasing the request in more natural scenario-style language. The rewrit-ten results (B, Q ), derived from ( ˜B, ˜Q), combine with D, c, and V from earlier stages to form the final samples. 

Source-specific adaptations. The textbook sub-set follows the pipeline above directly, with PDF ex-traction assisted by MinerU 1 and manual proofread-ing. The case-library subset differs only in extrac-tion. We retain cases with both a complete analysis report and a structured dataset, induce ( ˜B, ˜Q, ˜A)

from the report through a multi-call LLM chain, and summarize raw data files into a uniform data de-scription used as D. To avoid directly releasing the source data, we further replace the row-level values in D with simulated values generated by GPT-5. Further details are provided in Appendix A.2. 

4.3 Human Verification 

To ensure the reliability of the benchmark, all 1,013 samples in S TAT FORM BENCH are manually re-viewed. The review covers the problem category c

and the variable set V , with both verified against the reference answers in the source materials. For the 629 textbook samples, we conduct two rounds of review by different PhD-level experts in statistics. The first reviewer checks and cor-rects each initial annotation against the exercise and its reference answer. A second reviewer then re-examines the corrected annotation. Any dis-agreements between the two rounds are resolved by a senior reviewer, who determines the final la-bels. For the 384 case-library samples from GouX-iongHui, the initial annotations are easier to verify because each sample is derived from a complete analysis report that documents the underlying ana-lytical process. A PhD-level expert reviews every annotation against the report and associated struc-tured data. 

> 1

https://mineru.net/ 4.4 Dataset Statistics 

The final benchmark contains 1,013 samples, with 629 from textbooks and 384 from the case library. As shown in Figure 3, the dataset covers a broad range of problem categories, with substantial mass in data visualization, mathematical calculation, and hypothesis testing and interval estimation. The number of variables per sample is concentrated at small values but has a long tail, reflecting both compact textbook exercises and more complex case-library scenarios. A more detailed break-down of the category distribution is provided in Appendix D. 

5 Evaluation Metrics 

For the j-th sample, let c(j) = ( c(j)CG , c (j)FG ) and 

ˆc(j) = (ˆ c(j)CG , ˆc(j)FG ) denote the reference and pre-dicted problem categories, and let V (j) and ˆV (j)

denote the reference and predicted variable sets. 

5.1 Metrics for Statistical Problem Classification 

We report coarse-grained and fine-grained classifi-cation accuracy, 

ACC CG = 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

1[ˆ c(j)CG = c(j)CG ], (3) 

ACC FG = 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

1[ˆ c(j)FG = c(j)FG ]. (4) 

Since a correct fine-grained prediction implies a correct coarse-grained one, the gap between the two reflects how often models identify the broad analytical intent but miss the specific problem type. 

5.2 Metrics for Variable Identification and Role Assignment Variable matching. Because variable identifiers are model-generated, we first match each predicted variable ˆv ∈ ˆV (j) to a reference variable v ∈ V (j)

when their value fields are exactly equal. Let M (j)

be the resulting set of matched pairs. Unmatched predictions and unmatched reference variables are treated as false positives and false negatives. Fur-ther implementation details and results from a hu-man validation study of this matching rule are pro-vided in Appendix E.1. 

Variable identification metrics. To evaluate variable identification, we report three set-level                                                                                            

> Model Classification Variable Id. & Role
> ACC CG ACC FG JCV PV RV VRI Claude Opus 4.6 77.7 69.5 63.2 65.8 72.9 66.2
> Claude Sonnet 4.6 71.9 63.9 62.4 65.0 70.9 63.3 GPT-5.5 72.9 67.2 52.1 53.7 67.2 61.1 GPT-5.4 75.2 65.8 52.0 53.7 68.3 62.0 Gemini 3.1 Pro 79.0 72.0 61.5 64.5 68.3 63.1 Gemini 3 Flash 77.0 68.4 62.4 66.1 68.9 63.6 Kimi-K2.5 71.5 64.8 59.3 61.3 69.8 63.8 DeepSeek-V4-Pro 66.2 59.1 61.5 64.9 67.3 60.3 DeepSeek-V4-Flash 71.2 64.8 54.5 56.1 70.9 65.3 Qwen3.5-397B-A17B 70.6 64.6 57.2 60.5 66.5 61.4 Qwen3.5-9B 29.1 20.3 48.3 51.6 58.1 45.0 Qwen3.5-4B 37.7 30.6 45.4 48.7 54.9 41.1 Qwen3.5-2B 7.7 3.5 22.3 32.0 25.2 7.1 Qwen3.5-0.8B 7.9 3.8 5.6 8.3 7.6 3.0

Table 1: Main results on S TAT FORM BENCH . Bold 

denotes the best result, and underline denotes the second best. 

metrics. The Jaccard coefficient of variable sets (JCV) measures overall overlap, 

JCV = 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

|M (j)|| ˆV (j)| + |V (j)| − | M (j)| . (5) 

To further distinguish over-prediction from missed variables, we also report variable precision (PV) and variable recall (RV), 

PV = 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

|M (j)|| ˆV (j)| , (6) 

RV = 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

|M (j)||V (j)| . (7) 

Variable role identification (VRI). Let role( v)

denote the role field of v. We measure the fraction of reference variables that are both recovered and assigned the correct role using VRI, 

VRI = 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

P  

> (ˆ v,v )∈M(j)

1[role(ˆ v) = role( v)] 

|V (j)| . (8) 

This metric jointly penalizes missed variables and incorrect role labels. 

6 Experiments 

6.1 Setup 

We evaluate 14 LLMs from six model families on the two tasks defined in Section 3. The closed-source group includes Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026a), Claude Sonnet 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026b), GPT-5.5 (OpenAI, 2026b), GPT-5.4 (OpenAI, 2026a), Gemini 3.1 Pro (Google, 2026), and Gem-ini 3 Flash (Google, 2025). The open-source group includes Kimi-K2.5 (Team et al., 2026), DeepSeek-V4-Pro, DeepSeek-V4-Flash (DeepSeek-AI, 2026), TDA MC HTAIE AA DDM CEOSR CAP MI DS NC DV MCV 

> 020 40 60 80 100
> ACC CG
> Coarse-grained Category
> Claude Opus 4.6 GPT-5.5 Gemini 3.1 Pro Deepseek-V4-Pro
> EXPECT EPA MT SA IOI RBD
> 020 40 60 80 100
> ACC FG
> Fine-grained Category
> Claude Opus 4.6 GPT-5.5 Gemini 3.1 Pro Deepseek-V4-Pro

Figure 4: Classification accuracy by category. Top: coarse-grained categories with more than 10 samples. Bottom: fine-grained categories with the highest and lowest average accuracy. Category abbreviations are defined in Table 5. 

and five Qwen3.5 variants (397B-A17B, 9B, 4B, 2B, and 0.8B) (Qwen Team, 2026) that cover a broad range of model scales. All models are evalu-ated on the full benchmark under zero-shot prompt-ing, and additional prompting strategies are exam-ined in Section 6.3. 

6.2 Main Results 

Table 1 presents the main results across 14 LLMs and reveals persistent challenges in both formu-lation tasks. For statistical problem classification, Gemini 3.1 Pro achieves the highest fine-grained ac-curacy at 72.0, followed by Claude Opus 4.6 at 69.5 and Gemini 3 Flash at 68.4. The strongest open-source models, Kimi-K2.5, DeepSeek-V4-Flash, and Qwen3.5-397B-A17B, perform similarly on this task and trail the best closed-source model by about 7 points. Across all models, coarse-grained accuracy is consistently higher than fine-grained accuracy, indicating that models can often capture the broad analytical intent but still struggle to dis-tinguish closely related subtypes. Model rankings differ for variable identification and role assignment. Claude Opus 4.6 achieves the highest JCV at 63.2 and also leads on RV and VRI, while Gemini 3 Flash obtains the highest PV. Meanwhile, performance of models can also di-verge substantially between the two tasks. Both GPT-5.4 and GPT-5.5 exceed 65 on ACC FG but re-

Source Model ACC FG JCV VRI 

Book Claude Opus 4.6 78.5 51.0 56.9 Gemini 3.1 Pro 83.8 48.1 50.9 GPT-5.5 84.1 33.6 47.5 DeepSeek-V4-Pro 74.1 48.6 50.0 Case Claude Opus 4.6 54.7 83.2 81.3 Gemini 3.1 Pro 52.6 83.6 83.1 GPT-5.5 39.6 82.4 83.3 DeepSeek-V4-Pro 34.6 82.5 77.2 

Table 2: Model performance across data sources. 

main near 52 on JCV. Even within the same model family, the relative ordering varies across metrics. Gemini 3 Flash surpasses Gemini 3.1 Pro on all four variable-related metrics, while DeepSeek-V4-Flash outperforms DeepSeek-V4-Pro on RV and VRI but trails it on JCV and PV. Taken together, these results show that no model consistently leads across both formulation tasks, leaving statistical problem formulation beyond the reliable reach of current LLMs. 

6.3 Fine-Grained Analysis Per-category performance. As shown in Fig-ure 4, performance varies substantially across prob-lem categories. At the coarse level, categories with explicit analytical goals, such as mathematical cal-culation and hypothesis testing, are easier, whereas categories that require distinguishing closely re-lated analytical intents, such as model compari-son and model interpretation, are more difficult. This contrast becomes more pronounced at the fine-grained level. Models perform well on categories with clear operational cues but struggle when cat-egory boundaries depend on subtle differences in the user request or data representation. 

Data source impact. We evaluate representative models separately on the two data sources and ob-serve a clear asymmetry, as shown in Table 2. On textbook samples, ACC FG ranges from 74.1 to 84.1, while JCV ranges from 33.6 to 51.0. On case-library samples, the pattern reverses, with JCV be-tween 82.4 and 83.6 but ACC FG between 34.6 and 54.7. This contrast reflects the characteristics of the two subsets. Textbook problems align better with standard statistical categories because they are typically designed around clearly defined problem types, making classification easier, but their com-pact data presentations demand careful variable extraction. Case-library problems instead provide structured datasets whose columns correspond di-Model ACC FG JCV VRI 

Claude Opus 4.6 69.5 63.2 66.2 

w/ Category Def. +2.8 -2.0 +0.6 GPT-5.5 67.2 52.1 61.1 

w/ Category Def. +1.9 +0.8 +0.0 Gemini 3.1 Pro 72.0 61.5 63.1 

w/ Category Def. +3.8 -0.7 -0.9 

Table 3: Impact of prompting strategies. Zero-shot reports absolute scores, and other rows report positive or negative changes from zero-shot. 0 1 2 3num of shots 50 60 70       

> ACC FG
> 0123num of shots
> JCV
> 0123num of shots
> VRI
> Claude Opus 4.6 DeepSeek-V4-Pro Gemini 3.1 Pro GPT-5.5 Kimi-K2.5 Qwen3.5-397B

Figure 5: Few-shot performance across prompting set-tings and metrics. 

rectly to variables, making extraction easier, while their proximity to real-world analytical scenarios makes the problem types harder to classify. 

Prompting with category definitions. Prompt-ing strategies are known to affect LLM perfor-mance, and we examine their impact on formu-lation. As shown in Table 3, providing category definitions improves fine-grained classification for all three models by 1.9 to 3.8 points, indicating that explicit taxonomy information helps models dis-tinguish closely related labels. Its effects on JCV and VRI are smaller and mixed, with most changes within one point. This suggests that explicit defini-tions can clarify category distinctions, but benefit to variable identification and role assignment is inconsistent and may be offset by the additional context. 

Few-shot prompting. Figure 5 shows the ef-fect of few-shot examples across six models. For 

ACC FG , models with stronger zero-shot perfor-mance improve slightly as the number of shots increases, whereas lower-performing models gen-erally drop at one shot before partially recovering. For VRI, Gemini 3.1 Pro and GPT-5.5 improve, while the remaining models stay nearly flat or de-cline. JCV improves modestly for most models, with DeepSeek-V4-Pro as the main exception. This pattern suggests that examples may help models align their variable outputs with the expected rep-DV DS HTAIE MC MCV MI NC                                                               

> Predicted Category
> DV DS HTAIE MC MCV MI NC
> True Category
> 0.76 0.08 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.03 0.71 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.05 0.03 0.01 0.03 0.91 0.04 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.97 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.24 0.76 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.03 0.85 0.00 0.07 0.07 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.07 0.73
> Coarse-grained Category
> SA RBD1 EPA IOR1 PT
> Predicted Category
> SA RBD1 RBD2 IOI AOT
> True Category
> 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.20 0.00 0.00 0.19 0.00 0.00 0.14 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.19 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.60 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.50 0.00 0.00
> Fine-grained Category
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Proportion
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Proportion

Figure 6: Confusion matrices for hierarchical classifi-cation, focusing on frequently confused categories (we only present the key parts of matrices). Values are nor-malized by true labels. 

resentation but do not resolve the conceptual dis-tinctions required for category classification and role assignment. Overall, few-shot examples do not substantially improve statistical problem for-mulation. 

6.4 Error Analysis 

The confusion matrices in Figure 6 show that mod-els often confuse categories that share surface cues but differ in analytical intent. For example, model comparison is frequently predicted as model inter-pretation. At the fine-grained level, many errors remain within the correct first-level category, sug-gesting that models may recover the broad ana-lytical intent yet fail to distinguish closely related subtypes. 

Representative cases. Table 4 presents two cases that illustrate how these confusions arise in indi-vidual samples. In the first case, GPT-5.4 correctly identifies the problem type but extracts a redun-dant derived quantity, whereas the reference label records only the data objects required for the cal-culation. This over-specification is consistent with the tendency toward redundant variable extraction observed in the main results. In the second case, DeepSeek-V4-Pro correctly identifies the relevant variable but treats it as continuous rather than dis-crete, which leads to an incorrect fine-grained vi-sualization category. These cases confirm that sta-tistical formulation demands joint reasoning across data representation and analytical intent, where a single misjudgment can propagate through the en-tire formulation chain. 

7 Conclusion 

We study statistical problem formulation as an eval-uation target for LLMs and decompose it into sta-Error case Input Prediction Truth  

> GPT-5.4 Variables Among 41 patients, 26 had tumors on the same side as phone use. Compute the standardized evidence score for departure from an even-split benchmark.
> Category:
> Proportion Test
> Variables:
> same_side_count ,
> total_patients_count ,
> hypothesized_proportion ,
> observed_same_side_proportion
> Category:
> Proportion Test
> Variables:
> same_side_count ,
> total_patients_count ,
> hypothesized_proportion
> DeepSeek-V4-Pro Category What is the distribution of short-term rental reviews (vol_num ) like?
> Category:
> Distribution of Continuous Variables
> Variables:
> vol_num
> Category:
> Distribution of Discrete Variables
> Variables:
> vol_num

Table 4: Representative errors, with irrelevant fields omitted. Red text marks incorrect parts of model outputs. 

tistical problem classification and variable iden-tification with role assignment. To support this evaluation, we construct S TAT FORM BENCH , a benchmark of 1,013 samples drawn from five cross-domain statistics textbooks and a data science case library. The benchmark covers 20 coarse-grained and 85 fine-grained problem categories, and presents problems in scenario-style language that reflects how practitioners describe analytical needs. Experiments on 14 LLMs show that no model performs consistently best across the two formu-lation tasks. The highest zero-shot fine-grained classification accuracy is 72.0, while the highest variable set overlap is 63.2, with the two results achieved by different models. Fine-grained analy-ses further show that performance of LLMs varies substantially across problem categories, while prompting strategies yield only limited and incon-sistent gains. Taken together, these findings indi-cate that statistical problem formulation remains be-yond the reliable reach of current models. Bridging this gap may require tighter integration of domain knowledge, statistical reasoning, and data-aware in-ference. We hope S TAT FORM BENCH helps clarify where current models fall short and supports the de-velopment of more capable statistical formulation assistants. 

Limitations 

Our benchmark has several limitations. First, the samples are derived from solved textbook exercises and a case library rather than real-world statistical consultations. This reflects a trade-off between real-ism and data accessibility, since real consultations often contain sensitive information and are subject to confidentiality constraints. We use constrained scenario rewriting to bring these curated sources closer to real consultations, but the resulting sam-ples may still not fully capture the ambiguity and underspecification of real consulting. Second, the category distribution is imbalanced, with a sub-stantial portion of samples concentrated in a few common types, such as data visualization and hy-pothesis testing. As a result, performance estimates for low-frequency categories may be less reliable. Third, the textbook subset is originally in English, whereas the case-library subset is originally in Chi-nese and translated for evaluation. This bilingual origin may introduce subtle cross-lingual effects that are not explicitly considered in the current evaluation. 

Ethical Statements 

This work does not involve human subjects, and no personally identifiable information appears in the dataset. The textbook exercises are drawn from published educational materials. The case-library data were pre-anonymized by the data provider be-fore we received them, with all personal names, or-ganizational identifiers, and other potentially iden-tifying attributes removed or replaced with place-holders. We manually verified a random subset and confirmed the absence of residual identifiable content. 

Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (Grant No. AI2026019). We thank GouXiongHui for providing the case-library data used to construct the benchmark. We also thank Shuang Chen, Jiepeng Lai, Zikai Lin, Zi-chong Wang, and Ruitong Zhang for their care-ful review and verification of the textbook annota-tions. References 

Ali AhmadiTeshnizi, Wenzhi Gao, and Madeleine Udell. 2024. Optimus: Scalable optimization modeling with (MI)LP solvers and large language models. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235, pages 577–596. Douglas G. Altman. 1991. Practical Statistics for Medi-cal Research . Chapman & Hall. Anthropic. 2026a. Introducing claude opus 4.6. https: //www.anthropic.com/news/claude-opus-4-6 .Accessed: 2026-05-26. Anthropic. 2026b. Introducing claude sonnet 4.6. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-sonnet-4-6 . Accessed: 2026-05-26. Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Yuting Ning, Qianheng Zhang, Boshi Wang, Botao Yu, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao, Chen Wei, Zitong Lu, Vishal Dey, Mingyi Xue, Frazier N. Baker, Benjamin Burns, Daniel Adu-Ampratwum, Xuhui Huang, Xia Ning, Song Gao, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. 2025. Scienceagentbench: Toward rigorous as-sessment of language agents for data-driven scientific discovery. Preprint , arXiv:2410.05080. Penny A. Cook and C. Philip Wheater. 2000. Using Statistics to Understand the Environment . Routledge. DeepSeek-AI. 2026. Deepseek-v4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelli-gence. https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/ DeepSeek-V4-Pro .B. Burt Gerstman. 2007. Basic Biostatistics: Statistics for Public Health Practice , 1st edition. Jones & Bartlett Learning. Google. 2025. Gemini 3 flash: frontier intelli-gence built for speed. https://blog.google/ products-and-platforms/products/gemini/ gemini-3-flash/ . Accessed: 2026-05-26. Google. 2026. Gemini 3.1 pro: Best for complex tasks and bringing creative concepts to life. https: //deepmind.google/models/gemini/pro/ . Ac-cessed: 2026-05-26. GouXiongHui Org. GouXiongHui: Statistics Second Classroom. https://www.xiong99.com.cn/ .Ken Gu, Ruoxi Shang, Ruien Jiang, Keying Kuang, Richard-John Lin, Donghe Lyu, Yue Mao, Youran Pan, Teng Wu, Jiaqian Yu, Yikun Zhang, Tianmai M. Zhang, Lanyi Zhu, Mike A. Merrill, Jeffrey Heer, and Tim Althoff. 2024. BLADE: benchmarking lan-guage model agents for data-driven science. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 13936–13971. Chenyu Huang, Zhengyang Tang, Shixi Hu, Ruoqing Jiang, Xin Zheng, Dongdong Ge, Benyou Wang, and Zizhuo Wang. 2025. ORLM: A customizable frame-work in training large models for automated optimiza-tion modeling. Operations Research , 73(6):2986– 3009. Yiming Huang, Jianwen Luo, Yan Yu, Yitong Zhang, Fangyu Lei, Yifan Wei, Shizhu He, Lifu Huang, Xiao Liu, Jun Zhao, and Kang Liu. 2024. Da-code: Agent data science code generation benchmark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 13487–13521. Caigao Jiang, Xiang Shu, Hong Qian, Xingyu Lu, Jun Zhou, Aimin Zhou, and Yang Yu. 2025. Llmopt: Learning to define and solve general optimization problems from scratch. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 101580–101606. Liqiang Jing, Zhehui Huang, Xiaoyang Wang, Wen-lin Yao, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Hongming Zhang, Xinya Du, and Dong Yu. 2025. Dsbench: How far are data science agents from becoming data science experts? In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 32597–32649. Nikhil Khandekar, Qiao Jin, Guangzhi Xiong, Soren Dunn, Serina S Applebaum, Zain Anwar, Maame Sarfo-Gyamfi, Conrad W Safranek, Abid A An-war, Andrew Zhang, Aidan Gilson, Maxwell B Singer, Amisha Dave, Andrew Taylor, Aidong Zhang, Qingyu Chen, and Zhiyong Lu. 2024. MedCalc-Bench: Evaluating large language models for medi-cal calculations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 84730–84745. Fan Liu, Zherui Yang, Cancheng Liu, Tianrui Song, Xi-aofeng Gao, and Hao Liu. 2025. Mm-agent: Llm as agents for real-world mathematical modeling prob-lem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 38, pages 20881–20934. Xiao Liu, Zirui Wu, Xueqing Wu, Pan Lu, Kai-Wei Chang, and Yansong Feng. 2024. Are LLMs capable of data-based statistical and causal reasoning? bench-marking advanced quantitative reasoning with data. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 9215–9235. Yuchen Lu, Run Yang, Yichen Zhang, Shuguang Yu, Ziwei Wang, Jiayi Xiang, Wenxin E, Changyu Zhu, and Fan Zhou. 2026. Stateval: A comprehensive benchmark for large language models in statistics. 

Preprint , arXiv:2510.09517. Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Harshit Surana, Dhruv Agarwal, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Abhijeetsingh Meena, Aryan Prakhar, Tirth Vora, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. 2025. Discov-eryBench: Towards data-driven discovery with large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 4556– 4579. James T. McClave, P. George Benson, and Terry T. Sin-cich. 2013. Statistics for Business and Economics ,12th edition. Pearson. OpenAI, :, Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, Aleksander M ˛ adry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alex Kirillov, and 401 others. 2024. Gpt-4o system card. Preprint , arXiv:2410.21276. OpenAI. 2026a. Introducing gpt-5.4: Designed for professional work. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-gpt-5-4/ . Accessed: 2026-05-26. OpenAI. 2026b. Introducing gpt-5.5: A new class of intelligence for real work. https://openai.com/ index/introducing-gpt-5-5/ . Accessed: 2026-05-26. Hoang Pham. 2022. Statistical Reliability Engineering: Methods, Models and Applications . Springer Series in Reliability Engineering. Springer. Cheng Qian, Hongyi Du, Hongru Wang, Xiusi Chen, Yuji Zhang, Avirup Sil, ChengXiang Zhai, Kath-leen McKeown, and Heng Ji. 2025. Modelingagent: Bridging llms and mathematical modeling for real-world challenges. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 1599–1633. Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.5: Towards native multi-modal agents. https://qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5. Rindranirina Ramamonjison, Timothy T. L. Yu, Ray-mond Li, Haley Li, Giuseppe Carenini, Bissan Ghaddar, Shiqi He, Mahdi Mostajabdaveh, Amin Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Zirui Zhou, and Yong Zhang. 2022. Nl4opt competition: Formulating optimization problems based on their natural language descrip-tions. In NeurIPS 2022 Competition Track , volume 220 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 189–203. PMLR. Ruiran Su, Jiasheng Si, Zhijiang Guo, and Janet B. Pier-rehumbert. 2025. Climateviz: A benchmark for sta-tistical reasoning and fact verification on scientific charts. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 23436–23458. Kimi Team, Tongtong Bai, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, S. H. Cai, Yuan Cao, Ziwei Chai, Y. Charles, H. S. Che, Cheng Chen, Guanduo Chen, Huarong Chen, Jia Chen, Jianlong Chen, Jun Chen, Kefan Chen, Liang Chen, Ruijue Chen, Xinhao Chen, and 318 others. 2026. Kimi k2.5: Visual agentic intelligence. 

Preprint , arXiv:2602.02276. Benlu Wang, Iris Xia, Yifan Zhang, Junda Wang, Feiyun Ouyang, Shuo Han, Arman Cohan, Hong Yu, and Zonghai Yao. 2025. From scores to steps: Diagnos-ing and improving LLM performance in evidence-based medical calculations. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10809–10833. Ziyang Xiao, Dongxiang Zhang, Yangjun Wu, Lilin Xu, Yuan Wang, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin Fu, Tao Zhong, Jia Zeng, Mingli Song, and Gang Chen. 2024. Chain-of-experts: When llms meet complex opera-tions research problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 48519–48537. Shuo Yan, Ruochen Li, Ziming Luo, Zimu Wang, Daoyang Li, Liqiang Jing, Kaiyu He, Peilin Wu, Jun-tong Ni, George Michalopoulos, Yue Zhang, Ziyang Zhang, Mian Zhang, Zhiyu Chen, and Xinya Du. 2025. LMR-BENCH: evaluating LLM agent’s ability on reproducing language modeling research. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6164– 6186. Zhicheng Yang, Yiwei Wang, Yinya Huang, Zhi-jiang Guo, Shi Shi, Xiongwei Han, Liang Feng, Linqi Song, Xiaodan Liang, and Jing Tang. 2025. Optibench meets resocratic: Measure and improve llms for optimization modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 24726–24759. Dan Zhang, Sining Zhoubian, Min Cai, Fengzu Li, Lekang Yang, Wei Wang, Tianjiao Dong, Ziniu Hu, Jie Tang, and Yisong Yue. 2025. Datascibench: An llm agent benchmark for data science. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.13897. Yizhang Zhu, Shiyin Du, Boyan Li, Yuyu Luo, and Nan Tang. 2024. Are large language models good statisticians? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 62697–62731. 

A Data Processing and Annotation Details 

We provide implementation details for the pipeline stages described in Section 4.2. Prompt templates for each LLM-powered step are collected in Ap-pendix C. 

A.1 Textbook Processing Sample extraction. We use MinerU as the ini-tial PDF parser, which emits structured outputs for body text, equations, tables, and figures. Anno-tators then manually correct the parser output for each problem, including fixing OCR errors in equa-tions, replacing rasterized math with LaTeX, and transcribing tables that the parser misses. For each problem they produce a JSON entry containing the question text, reference answer, data (tabular, symbolic, or figure), and metadata (problem index, chapter/section identifiers, page range). The struc-tured triple (Qo, A o, D ) is directly extracted from this entry. Worked examples and end-of-section exercises share the same protocol, except that for the latter the reference answer typically lives in a separate solutions appendix. All entries undergo a final proofreading pass before entering the next stage. 

Sub-question splitting. Once extraction is com-plete, an LLM ( gpt-4o ) identifies the shared sce-nario in each problem and decomposes it into a background ˜B together with individual ( ˜Q, ˜A)

pairs. A deterministic flattening step then turns each pair into an independent sample that inherits 

˜B and D, ensuring that every downstream sample carries exactly one analytical question. 

Quality filtering. Each split sample is then eval-uated by an LLM ( gpt-5.4 ) against a set of exclu-sion criteria, producing a binary retain-or-discard label. Discarded samples include problems too ba-sic to test statistical reasoning (such as looking up a single datum or pure concept recall without compu-tation, though graphing and numerical calculation problems are retained), problems with incomplete information (e.g., those depending on an earlier problem’s result), and problems whose reference answer is empty. 

Initial label construction. For retained samples, the annotator LLM ( claude-opus-4-6 ) produces initial labels in two stages. In the category labeling stage, the model selects a category in L1\L2 for-mat from the current taxonomy, or proposes a new category when none fits. In the subsequent vari-able extraction stage, it produces variable labels in the schema {id , value , class , role , description },grounding each variable in the solving steps of ˜A.These model-generated labels serve only as initial candidates and are subsequently verified by human reviewers as described in Section 4.3. 

Scenario rewriting. Finally, gpt-5 rewrites 

( ˜B, ˜Q) into (B, Q ), rephrasing statistical terminol-ogy into intuitive language, switching to a first-person collective voice, and preserving all numeri-cal values. A self-evaluation prompt then checks whether the rewrite drifts from the original intent and triggers a one-shot correction when it does. 

A.2 Case-Library Adaptations 

Compared with the textbook subset, the case-library subset differs only in the sample extraction stage, as the raw materials arrive in a fundamentally different form. 

Project selection and data simulation. The source collection of cases from GouXiongHui con-tains 142 data-analysis projects with reports, code, and data in heterogeneous formats. We use only projects that include a complete analysis report and at least one data file that can be converted into a structured tabular representation. Image, au-dio, and other unstructured media files are then ex-cluded, while the remaining tabular, serialized, and text data are converted into pandas.DataFrame ob-jects. Each data frame is then summarized into a data dictionary containing the table shape, column names, data types, per-column descriptive statistics, missing-value counts, and a five-row preview. To protect the data provider’s copyright, we further re-place the original five-row preview with simulated rows generated by GPT-5 under constraints that preserve each field’s data type, value range, and distributional characteristics. 

Question induction and annotation. For each retained project, the HTML analysis report and data dictionary are provided to gpt-4o-mini , which produces a case overview and a set of independent analysis questions. Each question is paired with a report-grounded answer and the variables needed for analysis. A second gpt-4o-mini call checks whether the questions are of moderate difficulty, mutually independent, and supported by the report. Outputs that fail these criteria are revised using the model’s feedback for up to five rounds. After a question passes this check, separate gpt-4o calls produce its initial category and variable annota-tions. This process directly produces independent 

( ˜B, ˜Q, ˜A) tuples, making sub-question splitting un-necessary for the case-library subset. 

B Statistical Problem Taxonomy 

The taxonomy contains 20 first-level and 85 

second-level categories, designed by jointly con-sidering canonical statistical problem types from standard practice and problem types that surface in our collected samples. Table 5 lists all categories with brief descriptions derived from the operational definitions used in annotation. We do not claim that the taxonomy exhausts every statistical problem type, and we expect it to grow as additional data sources are incorporated. 

C Prompt Templates 

We present the prompt templates used in each LLM-powered pipeline step (Section 4.2), listed in pipeline order. L1 Category Abbr L2 Category Abbr Description Data Preproc. DP Missing Value Handling MVH Impute or delete missing data Outlier Handling OH Detect and treat anoma-lies Standardization STANDA Rescale to comparable units Binning BINNIN Discretize into intervals Transformation TRANSF Log, Box-Cox, unit con-version 

Math. Calc. MC Prob. Space Re-lated PSR Count configurations or states Event Prob. & In-dependence EPA Probability rules, indepen-dence Expectation EXPECT Expected values, long-run averages Min. Sample Size for Target Prob. MSS Min n for a probability target Distribution Derivation DD Derive probability distri-butions Other OTHER Misc. probability calcula-tions 

Numer. Comp. NC Model Param. Es-timation OMP Analytic or numeric esti-mation Sampling from Spec. Distrib. SFA Generate random draws 

Descr. Stat. DS Central Tendency MOC Mean, median, mode Dispersion MOD1 Variance, SD, CV, IQR Distribution Range MOD2 Range, min, max Frequency & Pro-portion MOF Counts, proportions, risk ratios Quantiles / Per-centiles QUANTI Values at specified ranks Network Graph Indicators NGI Degree, centrality, den-sity Stat. Property Comparison AAC Compare estimator prop-erties Other (e.g., relia-bility) OR Cronbach’s α, consis-tency 

Dist. Model. DDM Model Building MB Choose distribution fam-ily MLE MLE Maximum likelihood fit-ting Bayesian BAYESI Posterior from prior and data 

Data Visual. DV Discrete Var. Dis-trib. DOD Bar, pie charts Continuous Var. Distrib. DOC Histogram, density, box plot Discrete & Con-tinuous RBD1 Grouped box / density plots Continuous &Continuous RBC Scatter plots, fitted curves Discrete & Dis-crete RBD2 Grouped bar, mosaic plots Multi-Var. Com-parison CCO Heatmap, radar, parallel coords Trends Over Time TOT Line, time-series, area charts Spatial & Geo-graphic SAG Choropleth, spatial scat-ter Text & Symbolic TAS Text / symbol visualiza-tion Stem-and-Leaf Plot SP Distribution with raw dig-its Other Stat. Graphics OSG Specialized statistical plots 

Association AA Correlation Co-eff. (1-D) CC Pearson, Spearman, Kendall CCA (Multidi-mensional) CCA Canonical correlation Contingency Ta-ble CT Joint categorical distribu-tion 

Clustering CLU Clustering CLUSTE Unsupervised grouping 

Dim. Reduct. DR Dimensionality Reduction DR PCA, t-SNE, UMAP 

L1 Category Abbr L2 Category Abbr Description Hyp. Testing † HTAIE Independence Test IT χ2, Fisher exact Mean Test MT t-test, paired, two-sample Variance Test VT Compare population vari-ances ANOVA ANOVA Group variation decompo-sition Distribution Test DT KS, Shapiro-Wilk Proportion Test PT Compare group propor-tions Likelihood Ratio Test LRT1 Nested model comparison Sequential Test ST Sequential testing (SPRT) Randomness RANDOM Runs test, randomness test Regression Param. Test RMP Coefficient significance test Test Properties AOT Power, size, Type I/II er-ror 

Model Comp. MCV Criterion-Based (AIC, BIC) CCB Information criteria com-parison Cross-Validation CROSS- Data-splitting generaliza-tion Likelihood Ratio Test LRT2 Nested model selection by LR ROC / AUC RCC Classifier discrimination Important Var. Identif. IOI Stepwise, LASSO selec-tion 

Model Diag. MD Residual Analy-sis RA Residual patterns, influ-ence Goodness-of-Fit GA R2, adjusted R2

Model Interp. MI Coeff. Signif. & Direction IOR1 Interpret coefficient sign Effect Size IOR2 Magnitude of predictor ef-fects Classif./Occur. Prob. IOF Interpret OR, HR Ordered Out-come Mech. IOM Ordinal model interpreta-tion Variable Impor-tance IOV SHAP, standardized coef-ficients Group Hetero-geneity IOG Subgroup effect compari-son 

Classif./Pred. CAP Continuous Value Pred. CVP Predict numerical out-comes Categorical Clas-sif. CVC Predict unordered classes Ordered Multi-Class MCO Predict ordinal outcomes Quantile Predic-tion QP Conditional quantile pre-diction Survival Analysis SA1 Time-to-event (KM, Cox) 

Time Series TSA Lag Correlation LCA ACF, PACF analysis Stationarity SA2 Unit root tests (ADF, KPSS) Seasonality SA3 Periodic pattern detection Factor Decompo-sition DFD Trend, seasonal, cycle Volatility VA ARCH/GARCH model-ing 

Text Data TDA Word Frequency WFS Token count and ranking Topic Modeling TM Latent topics (LDA) Sentiment Analy-sis SA4 Text polarity classifica-tion 

Network Data NDA Community De-tection CD Dense node group identi-fication Link Prediction LP Missing / future edge pre-diction 

Exper. Design ED Plan Design EPD Design experiments / sam-pling Plan Evaluation EPE Evaluate sampling quality 

Causal Inf. CI Observational Data OD PSM, IV, DiD estimation Experimental Data ED RCT, A/B test effects 

Critical Eval. CEOSR Stat. Fallacies & Biases IOS Detect statistical misuse Result Reliability EOR Assess result reliability 

Table 5: Complete statistical problem taxonomy ( 20 first-level, 85 second-level categories). † L2 categories under Hypothesis Testing also cover the corresponding interval-estimation tasks. Quality Filtering Prompt ( gpt-5.4 )

You are a professional statistics instructor. Judge whether the following exercise is suitable for testing statistical proficiency. 

Input: {background, data, question, answer} 

Judge the exercise as unsuitable (judge =0) if any of the following conditions applies: • Overly basic: the exercise requires only a single data lookup or pure concept recall without computation. Retain graphing and numerical calculation problems. • Incomplete information: the description is ambiguous, or the question depends on a preceding problem’s result that is not provided. • Empty answer: the answer field is blank. Note: tables referenced in question may appear as LaTeX code in data . This does not count as missing information. 

Output: {"judge": 1/0, "explanation": "..."} 

Category Annotation Prompt ( claude-opus-4-6 )

You are a strict statistical problem category annotator. Given a sample’s background , data , and question , select the most appropriate category label from the statistical problem taxonomy below. 

Requirements: 

1. If a fitting L2 category exists, write it strictly as “L1\L2” in suggested_category .2. If no L2 category fits, fill proposed_new_category instead and leave suggested_category empty. 3. reason must explain the choice or why a new category is needed. 

Statistical Problem Taxonomy (20 L1 and 85 L2 categories, abridged): • Data Preprocessing : [Missing Value Handling, Outlier Handling, Standardization, Binning, Transformation] • Mathematical Calculation : [Probability Space, Event Probability & Independence, Expectation, Min. Sample Size for Target Probability, Distribution Derivation, Other] • Hypothesis Testing & Interval Estimation : [Independence Test, Mean Test, Variance Test, ANOVA, Distribution Test, Proportion Test, Likelihood Ratio Test, Sequential Test, Randomness, Regression Parameter Test, Test Properties] . . . (The remaining 17 L1 categories are listed in Appendix B )Each L2 category is accompanied by a one-sentence definition in the actual prompt. 

Input: {background, data, question} 

Output: {"suggested_category": "...", "proposed_new_category": "...", "reason": "..."} 

Variable Extraction Prompt ( claude-opus-4-6 )

You are a strict statistical annotator. Extract the variable objects that the answer actually uses in its solving process. 

Key requirements (8 rules): 1. Variables are data objects required to answer the research question, including raw columns, sample sizes, means, SDs, and contingency tables. Exclude model parameters and test statistics ( z, p, t, F ). 2. Ground extraction in the answer’s actual reasoning. Omit variables the answer never uses, and include variables that appear symbolically in question or answer even when data is empty. 3. For grouped data, create one variable object per group. 4. For per-variable summary statistics, store aggregates in the value field as JSON. 5. Variable objects include raw columns, grouped statistics, contingency tables, sample sizes, and success counts. When the answer constructs a derived variable from multiple originals, retain all originals and omit the derived one. 6. For “Mathematical Calculation” problems, probabilities, sample sizes, and other numerical objects used in the answer are also treated as variable objects. 7. If the answer’s solving process is missing or overly brief, infer the minimal variable set needed to reach the final answer. If no variables are needed, output empty JSON. 8. Output must be valid JSON with variable id values as top-level keys. Do not include extra text. 

Fields per variable: 

id : A variable identifier. 

value : Store a table column as an array, aggregated measures as JSON, and any other value in its original recorded form. When multiple numerical values are present, preserve their order in the source problem. 

class : One of numerical , categorical , or others .

role : One of predictor , response , both , or N/A .

description : A brief description of the variable. Roles: predictor denotes a predictor variable, response denotes a response variable, and both denotes an undirected association or a dual role. N/A indicates that no directional role is needed, as with identifiers, filters, unsupervised features, and single-variable distributions. Special-case rules for time-trend problems and variables serving dual construction roles are included in the full prompt. 

Input: {background, data, question, answer} 

Output: {"VAR": {"id", "value", "class", "role", "description"}, . . . } Scenario Rewriting Prompt ( gpt-5 )

You are a statistician. Rewrite the background and question of the given statistical problem to create a more realistic formulation challenge from a domain practitioner’s perspective. 

Requirements: 

• Use business language from the relevant domain. Do not use statistical terminology or explicitly state the target statistical problem category. • Switch to a first-person collective voice (“we”). • Preserve all numerical values, named entities, and table/figure labels. • The rewritten problem must still map to the same formalized statistical model. • The wording may be appropriately vague, and distracting context may be added. The full statistical problem taxonomy and variable specification used in the two prompts above are also provided so the model can verify that the mapping is preserved. They are omitted here for brevity. Two worked examples demonstrating the rewriting style are included in the actual prompt. 

Input: {background, data, question} + target statistical model 

Output: {"background": "...", "question": "..."} 

Rewrite Self-Evaluation Prompt ( gpt-5 )

You are an expert evaluator of problem reformulation. Given the original problem, its formal statistical model, the derivation reasoning, and the rewritten problem, check whether the rewrite meets all of the following standards: 1. Numerical values in the original are preserved. No unauthorized new data is introduced. 2. The analytical direction of the original problem is maintained. No new problem is created. 3. Table and figure labels are unchanged. 4. The rewritten question does not explicitly state the target statistical problem category. 5. The rewritten problem still matches the given formal statistical model. 

Input: original problem, statistical model, derivation reasoning, rewritten problem 

Output: {"pass": true/false, "feedback": "..."} Statistical Problem Formulation Prompt 

You are a professional statistician. Abstract the statistical formulation of the following problem. The input format is: 

{ "background": "Relevant description of the problem context (which may also contain some data)", "data": "The data used, presented as a table in LaTeX code", "question": "The core problem" } 

The statistical formulation includes the following two parts: 1. Statistical problem category 

{statistical problem taxonomy } 

2. Relevant variables and their roles Key requirements: 1. Variables refer specifically to data objects collected for the research objective (e.g., sample size, mean, standard deviation), excluding model parameters, z-scores, p-values, t-values, or F-values. 2. Variable objects can be raw data columns, grouped statistics, contingency tables, sample sizes, success counts, or time variables. 3. For "Mathematical Calculation" problems, treat numerical objects (probabilities, sample sizes) used in the answer as variables. 4. If there is no explicit data table or if data is empty, variables must still be extracted when symbolic variables or statistics appear. 5. When the data have a grouping structure, split them into multiple variables by group. 6. If aggregated measures are provided for multiple variables, create a separate variable object for each, writing measures into the value field as JSON. 7. If the information is insufficient, output an empty JSON object: {} .8. Output must be valid JSON with variable IDs as top-level keys. Do not include extra text. Field specifications: • Top-level key: Variable name (extracted or assigned). • id : Must match top-level key. • value : An array for table columns, JSON for aggregated measures, or the original form (e.g., a TeX table). When multiple numerical values are present, preserve their order in the source problem. • class : One of numerical , categorical , others .• role : One of predictor , response , both , or N/A . Use both for an undirected association or a dual role. Use N/A 

when no directional role is needed, as with identifiers, filters, unsupervised methods, and distribution descriptions. • description : Brief description. Special role cases: • For "Trends Over Time" visualization, assign predictor to the time variable and response to the changing variable. • If a variable serves as a predictor and is also used to construct the response, assign predictor .• If a variable serves as a response and is also used to construct the predictor, assign response .Note: Shallow correlation analyses typically use "Data Visualization." Deeper analyses of direction, magnitude, or significance use modeling and interpretation. Time series forecasting uses "Continuous Value Prediction." "Time Series Analysis" focuses on interpretation. Output format: JSON. Example: 

{ "category": "Relationship Between Continuous Variables", "variables": { "height": { "id": "height", "value": {" μ": 138, " σ": 7}, "class": "numerical", "role": "N/A", "description": "Heights of 10-year-old boys modeled as Normal( μ=138 cm, σ=7 cm)." }, "threshold": { "id": "threshold", "value": 150, "class": "numerical", "role": "N/A", "description": "Cutoff value (150 cm) used in the z-score calculation z=(150-138)/7." } } } D Additional Dataset Statistics 

Figure 7 complements the dataset overview in Figure 3 by showing the fine-grained composition of the most frequent coarse-grained categories. DV MC HTAIE CAP DS MCV MI CEOSR TDA AA OTH Coarse-grained Category 

DV: Data Visualization (275) MC: Mathematical Calculation (241) HTAIE: Hypothesis Testing and Interval Estimation (174) CAP: Classification and Prediction (49) DS: Descriptive Statistics (41) MCV: Model Comparison (Variable Selection) (38) MI: Model Interpretation (38) CEOSR: Critical Evaluation of Statistical Results (35) TDA: Text Data Analysis (23) AA: Association Analysis (22) OTH: Others (77) 

Fine-grained Category 

RBD1: Relationship Between Discrete and Continuous Variables (98) DOC: Distribution of Continuous Variables (58) RBD2: Relationship Between Discrete Variables (31) DOD: Distribution of Discrete Variables (29) TOT: Trends Over Time (20) RBC: Relationship Between Continuous Variables (19) SP: Stem-and-Leaf Plot (12) OTHERS1: Others (8) EPA: Event Probability and Independence (169) EXPECT: Expectation (33) MSS: Minimum Sample Size Required to Achieve a Specified Probability (15) PSR: Probability Space Related (e.g., number of states) (10) OTHERS2: Others (14) MT: Mean Test (68) PT: Proportion Test (27) IT: Independence Test (20) DT: Distribution Test (16) ANOVA: ANOVA (15) AOT: Analysis of Test Properties (11) OTHERS3: Others (17) CVP: Continuous Value Prediction (24) CVC: Categorical Variable Classification (13) SA: Survival Analysis (11) OTHERS4: Others (1) MOC: Measures of Central Tendency (12) OTHERS5: Others (29) IOI: Identification of Important Variables (36) OTHERS6: Others (2) IOR1: Interpretation of Regression Effect Size (13) IOR2: Interpretation of Regression Coefficient Significance and Direction (11) OTHERS7: Others (14) IOS: Identification of Statistical Fallacies and Biases (31) OTHERS8: Others (4) WFS: Word Frequency Statistics (17) OTHERS9: Others (6) CC: Correlation Coefficient (One-dimensional) (14) OTHERS10: Others (8) 

Figure 7: Category distribution at both taxonomy levels. The inner ring shows coarse-grained categories, with those containing no more than 20 samples grouped as Others. The outer ring shows the fine-grained composition of each displayed coarse-grained category. E Supplementary Results 

E.1 Exact-Value Matching Implementation and Validation Matching procedure. As specified in the vari-able extraction prompt above, the value field records the complete contents of a variable under a standardized schema. We use this field as the matching key so that synonymous variable names or descriptions do not affect the score. The pre-dicted and reference value fields are serialized, and a pair is matched only when the resulting strings are identical. No additional normaliza-tion or semantic matching is applied, which keeps the evaluation rule deterministic and reproducible. Each predicted and reference variable can appear in at most one matched pair, with unmatched pre-dictions and reference variables counted as false positives and false negatives, respectively. Conse-quently, per-sample JCV equals one only when ev-ery predicted and reference variable can be paired through exact value equality. 

Validation study. To quantify how often exact-value matching rejects semantically correct corre-spondences, we conduct a targeted validation study on a challenging subset. We define a matching-induced error as an output in which exact-value matching rejects at least one semantically correct variable correspondence. Such an error occurs when a correctly identified variable is treated as unmatched solely because the prediction uses a different variable decomposition or an equivalent value representation. For example, a model may represent a sample size and a mean as separate vari-ables while the reference stores both within a single variable entry, or represent a percentage as 50 rather than 50% . The challenging subset is defined using three representative closed-source models: Claude Opus 4.6, GPT-5.5, and Gemini 3.1 Pro. It con-tains 387 of the 629 textbook samples on which all three models have per-sample JCV below one. We randomly sample 60 cases from this subset, and a PhD-level expert compares each model’s predicted variable set with the reference label to determine whether any semantically correct correspondence is rejected. 

Results. As shown in Table 6, only about 10% of the sampled outputs for each model contain a matching-induced error, even in this challeng-ing subset. The results suggest that although exact-value matching can underestimate variable-    

> Model Matching-Induced Error Rate
> Claude Opus 4.6 11.7% (7/60) GPT-5.5 10.0% (6/60) Gemini 3.1 Pro 10.0% (6/60)
> Table 6: Matching-induced error rates on the validation subset.

identification performance to some extent, it does not account for the substantially lower JCV scores in the main experiments. E.2 Prompting Strategies 

Figure 8 supplements the few-shot analysis in Section 6.3 by reporting performance on all six evaluation metrics under the same experimental setting. The complete comparison leads to the same conclusion that adding examples to the prompt does not yield consistent gains across the two evaluated tasks. Zero-shot 1-shot 2-shot 3-shot 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 ACC CG     

> Zero-shot 1-shot 2-shot 3-shot 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80

ACC FG     

> Zero-shot 1-shot 2-shot 3-shot 45 50 55 60 65 70

JCV     

> Zero-shot 1-shot 2-shot 3-shot 50 55 60 65 70 75

PV     

> Zero-shot 1-shot 2-shot 3-shot 60 62 65 67 70 72 75 77 80

RV     

> Zero-shot 1-shot 2-shot 3-shot 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70

VRI  

> Claude Opus 4.6 DeepSeek-V4-Pro Gemini 3.1 Pro GPT-5.5 Kimi-K2.5 Qwen3.5-397B

Figure 8: Performance across prompting strategies on all six evaluation metrics. 

E.3 Full Comparisons by Data Source 

Table 7 extends the source-based analysis to ten models and all six metrics under the same evaluation setting. Consistent with the pattern observed in Section 6.3, classification accuracy is higher on textbook samples, whereas variable-related scores are higher on case-library samples. 

Source Model Classification Variable Id. & Role 

ACC CG ACC FG JCV PV RV VRI 

Book 

Claude Opus 4.6 82.7 78.5 51.0 55.1 63.2 56.9 Claude Sonnet 4.6 79.5 73.0 50.0 54.1 61.1 53.0 GPT-5.5 88.6 84.1 33.6 36.7 54.3 47.5 GPT-5.4 86.3 77.9 33.2 36.1 56.9 49.9 Gemini 3.1 Pro 88.7 83.8 48.1 52.8 57.2 50.9 Gemini 3 Flash 87.6 81.2 50.2 55.2 59.2 53.3 Kimi-K2.5 84.9 79.2 46.6 50.1 59.6 52.3 DeepSeek-V4-Pro 80.1 74.1 48.6 54.1 55.7 50.0 DeepSeek-V4-Flash 87.0 81.9 37.3 39.9 60.3 54.9 Qwen3.5-397B 83.9 79.0 45.3 49.5 58.7 51.5 

Case 

Claude Opus 4.6 69.5 54.7 83.2 83.3 88.8 81.3 Claude Sonnet 4.6 59.4 49.0 82.6 82.8 87.0 80.1 GPT-5.5 47.1 39.6 82.4 81.5 88.4 83.3 GPT-5.4 57.0 46.1 82.7 82.4 86.9 81.9 Gemini 3.1 Pro 63.0 52.6 83.6 83.7 86.5 83.1 Gemini 3 Flash 59.6 47.4 82.3 84.0 84.8 80.4 Kimi-K2.5 49.5 41.1 80.1 79.7 86.6 82.6 DeepSeek-V4-Pro 43.5 34.6 82.5 82.6 86.3 77.2 DeepSeek-V4-Flash 45.3 36.7 82.6 82.6 88.2 82.2 Qwen3.5-397B 48.7 40.9 76.6 78.6 79.2 77.7 

Table 7: Model performance across six metrics for each data source. E.4 All Results of Classification Accuracy by Category 

Figure 9 complements the category-level analysis with results for all categories containing more than 10 samples across ten models under the same evaluation setting. In line with the findings in Section 6.3, performance is higher when the analytical objective is explicit and lower when classification depends on subtle distinctions between related analytical intents. TDA MC HTAIE AA DDM CEOSR CAP MI DS NC DV MCV 

> 020 40 60 80 100
> ACC CG

Coarse-grained Category 

> EXPECT EPA MT MSS TOT CVP DT PT SP ANOVA CVC IT CC
> 020 40 60 80 100
> ACC FG

Fine-grained Category (1/2) 

> WFS MOC DOC IOS AOT OMP RBC IOR1 RBD1 IOR2 DOD SA1 IOI RBD2
> 020 40 60 80 100
> ACC FG

Fine-grained Category (2/2) 

> Claude Opus 4.6 GPT-5.5 GPT-5.4 Gemini 3.1 Pro Gemini 3 Flash Kimi-K2.5 DeepSeek-V4-Pro DeepSeek-V4-Flash Qwen3.5-397B

Figure 9: Classification accuracy for all categories with more than 10 samples. Top: coarse-grained categories. Middle and bottom: fine-grained categories.