Title: AlphaRoute: Large Language Models as Semantic Optimizers for Multi-Objective Routing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.19768v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Jul 2026 00:26:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# AlphaRoute: Large Language Models as Semantic Optimizers for Multi-Objective Routing 

Kabir Murjani 1, * , Mishri Bhavsar 2, Manish I. Patel 2, Jonti Talukdar 3

> 1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Institute of Technology, Nirma University, Ahmedabad, India 

> 2

Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Institute of Technology, Nirma University, Ahmedabad, India 

> 3

Center for Semiconductor Microelectronics, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA 

Abstract —Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) global routing is an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem requiring signal net assignment across capacity-constrained 3D grids while minimizing congestion, wirelength, and via transitions. Because traditional heuristics rely on static penalty schedules that fail on complex congestion topologies, we present AlphaRoute: a multi-objective adaptive search framework reformulating rip-up and reroute (R&R) into a dynamic optimization system. We introduce SHAP-based overflow decomposition to isolate per-net congestion, driving targeted subgraph extraction via 3D Dijkstra maze routing and an adaptive PathFinder policy. Crucially, AlphaRoute employs Large Language Models (LLMs) as se-mantic policy optimizers. Bounded by a deterministic knowledge graph, the LLMs interpret congestion metrics to dynamically adjust penalty parameters. Evaluated on ISPD 2025 benchmarks, AlphaRoute reduces overflow by 98.6% on MEMPOOL. On the constrained ARIANE design, we achieve an overflow of 146,109 (a 29.8x reduction in overflow over the state of the art), yielding a penalized score of Sorig = 0 .0538 versus the State-of-the-art (SOTA) 1.780. These results demonstrate that superior algorithmic search geometry can overcome the latency of interpreted Python implementations. 

Index Terms —Combinatorial Optimization, Global Routing, Physical Design, Rip-up and Reroute, Large Language Models, Knowledge Graphs, Explainable AI 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Global routing is an important phase of Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) physical design that assigns coarse routing paths for electrical connections (nets) across a chip layout, followed by detailed routing, which determines the exact routing tracks for each net. The chip is partitioned into global routing cells (GCells), and each signal net is assigned to a sequence of GCells to minimize wire length, reduce congestion, and control via count. Poorly managed congestion at this stage propagates into downstream violations: unroutable designs with Design Rule Checking (DRC) failures, timing degradation, excess power draw, and inflated die area. Modern designs intensify this challenge. Contemporary System-on-Chips (SoCs) contain hundreds of thousands to millions of nets 

* Corresponding author: kabirmurjani@gmail.com The complete codebase and evaluation scripts required to reproduce all results are publicly available at https://github.com/Kcbir/AlphaRoute. The benchmarks are the public ISPD 2025 contest designs [1]. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

routed across ten or more metal layers within grids exceeding one million GCells. At this scale, congestion interactions are highly non-local: a single over-subscribed channel can force cascading detours that ripple across distant regions of the chip. Classical routers manage these interactions through fixed penalty schedules, yet the optimal penalty trajectory depends on the specific congestion topology encountered at each iteration, information that static heuristics cannot exploit. Furthermore, as routing frameworks grow in complexity, de-signers lose visibility into which algorithmic knob drove a particular outcome, making it difficult to diagnose failures or transfer insights across designs. The global routing problem is NP-hard [2], so practi-cal solvers rely on heuristics. CUGR [3] targets detailed routability through probabilistic resource modeling. InstantGR [4] reduces runtime through GPU parallelization. PathFinder-based routers [5] use negotiation-based congestion resolution to balance overflow elimination against critical-path delay, and recent accelerators such as PAGR [6] target throughput of the global routing flow itself. Despite this progress, three limitations persist across existing frameworks: penalty param-eters are static and not adapted to the evolving congestion landscape, rip-up candidate selection is not driven by per-net overflow contribution, and there is no interpretable reasoning layer that explains why a particular routing policy was chosen. This work addresses all three gaps. The specific research contributions are: 1) SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP)-inspired over-flow decomposition and targeted rip-up: We introduce a permutation-importance-style analyzer [7] that decom-poses post-routing overflow into per-net scores, layer-wise fractions, and utilization-overflow correlations, en-abling the rip-up stage to select exactly the nets re-sponsible for congestion rather than relying on coarse heuristics. 2) Adaptive PathFinder policy with capacity-aware routing: We extend the classical PathFinder cost model [5] with SHAP-driven parameter rules that adjust the history penalty, present overflow weight, and via cost at each iteration. Initial routing further benefits from flexible dual L-shape evaluation and dynamic layer selection, which together reduce initial overflow by 2.2x on the ARIANE benchmark. arXiv:2607.19768v1 [cs.LG] 22 Jul 2026 3) Dijkstra maze rerouting within a 3D bounding-box sub-graph: Medium-area nets ripped by the SHAP analyzer are rerouted through a cost-aware Dijkstra search over a local subgraph, allowing the router to detour around congestion hotspots that simple L-routes or Steiner trees cannot resolve. 4) LLM-based interpretable policy adaptation with knowledge-graph validation: A Large Language Model (LLM) receives structured SHAP metrics and proposes parameter adjustments with natural-language reasoning. Proposals are validated against hard constraints stored in a RustworkX knowledge graph before application, combining interpretability with safety. On the International Symposium on Physical Design (ISPD) 2025 ARIANE benchmark dataset, AlphaRoute achieves an overflow of 146,109 (29.8x below SOTA in overflow) and a score of Sorig = 0 .0538 versus SOTA 1.780 (a 33 .1× score reduction). II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Classical and Graph-Based Global Routing 

FLUTE [8] remains a standard for fast rectilinear Steiner tree construction, but Steiner methods reason locally per net, ignoring the multi-net resource contention that drives overflow. Graph-based learning methods address this gap: graph atten-tion networks [9] introduced learned neighborhood weighting via message passing, and graph-representation Reinforcement Learning (RL) was shown to scale to industrial placement without manual feature engineering [10]. These results indicate that graph encoders can capture congestion coupling and long-range dependency more naturally than hand-crafted features. 

B. LLM-Based Evaluation and Its Limitations 

Using LLMs as automated judges scales evaluation but introduces systematic bias. A study of LLM judges found per-sistent position bias, verbosity bias, and self-preference, with the largest disagreements against human annotators on open-ended responses [11]. In a routing loop, such bias becomes a training target that pushes policy toward style over substance. This motivates our use of LLMs strictly for structured policy suggestion rather than as reward judges. 

C. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and Reward Grounding 

RLHF fits a reward model on human preferences and optimizes the policy against that signal [12], but the reward model must extrapolate beyond its training comparisons, and this error grows as the policy diverges from the data dis-tribution [13]. Nearest-neighbor language modeling showed that retrieval can anchor predictions to observed data instead of forcing unsupported generalization [14]. Our knowledge graph applies the same principle: it ties routing decisions to previously observed outcomes, keeping the loop grounded in measured results. Parse Input Files                  

> .cap and .net (III-A)
> Build Weighted 3D
> Graph (Eq. 1)
> Order Nets
> by area and then slack
> Steiner Tree
> Dual L-Shape Routing
> H-first vs V-first
> Net area
> An is below
> Threshold X?
> Prim MST Route
> Compute Overflow Ω
> (Eq. 2)
> Overflow=0
> or other stopping
> criteria met?
> Per-net score (Eq. 3)
> Layer Overflow (Eq. 4)
> Congested Fraction (Eq. 5)
> Knowledge Graph
> Update PathFindder
> Policy
> Ripup Top 20% Nets
> (Eq. 9)
> Reroute
> based on Net
> Area An
> Steiner Tree Dijkstra Maze MST+Flex-L
> Yes No
> Stop
> Routing
> LLM Policy Proposal
> An < Y
> Y<An <Z
> An > Z
> Yes No
> Recompute Overflow,
> Update iterations
> SHAP Overflow Analyser (III-D)

Fig. 1: AlphaRoute execution flow: input parsing and graph construction, slack-aware net ordering, initial routing, and the SHAP-guided rip-up/reroute loop with knowledge-graph validated LLM policy adaptation. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

This section describes AlphaRoute in order of execution, following the architecture in Fig. 1. The router, input parser, and RL policy loop are implemented in Python, with routing quality scored by a C++ evaluator. 

A. Input Representation and Graph Construction 

Input files ( .cap , .net ) are sourced from the ISPD 2025 contest dataset [1] and parsed. The .cap file defines per-GCell routing capacities C ∈ RNL×ymax ×xmax , layer costs, and scoring weights over a 10 × 646 × 646 grid (ARIANE); metal layer 0 is via-only. The .net file lists pin locations, GCell access points, and pre-routing slack estimates. A RustworkX graph is constructed over the parsed grid. Each GCell is mapped to a node via idx (z, y, x ) = z · Ymax · Xmax + y ·Xmax +x. Edges encode legal routing moves: horizontal layers connect (x, y, z ) to (x±1, y, z ), vertical layers connect it to 

(x, y ±1, z ), and vias to (x, y, z ±1) for z > 1 with a fixed cost of 40. The initial weight assigned to an edge e between adjacent cells u and v on layer z is: 

W (e) = (10 .0 − 3.0 · σn) + (11 − cz,u ) + (11 − cz,v ) (1) where σn ∈ [0 , 1] is the criticality factor of the net, derived from the worst-case pin slack sn relative to the global worst slack smin as σn = max(0 , 1 − sn/s min ). The net having slack as smin is the most time-critical net with a factor of 

σn = 1 .0 and a final base cost of 7.0, giving it a 30% discount over a non-critical net. The terms (11 − cz,u ) and (11 − cz,v )

add between 1 (empty cell, c = 10 ) and 11 (fully congested, 

c = 0 ), routing traffic away from overloaded GCells. 

B. Slack Aware Net Ordering 

Nets are ordered by bounding-box area first (large nets route first to reduce future congestion), then by most-negative slack among similarly sized nets, and finally single-GCell nets requiring only trivial resources. Area thus takes precedence over criticality: a large non-critical net routes before a smaller critical one, and ties in area are broken by criticality so the most time-critical net claims the shortest, least-resistive path. Non-critical nets route later and naturally detour around regions already occupied by critical nets. 

C. Initial Routing: Steiner / MST + Flexible L-Route 

A preliminary path is assigned to every net for the initial routing pass. Each net’s bounding-box area is computed as 

An = ( xnmax − xnmin )( ynmax − ynmin ), and the routing method is selected as follows. 1) Small Nets (Steiner Tree): Nets having area An ≤ 2, 500 

are routed through RustworkX’s Steiner tree algorithm. Steiner tree routing minimizes total wire length to connect all required nodes in the graph, utilizing intermediate GCells as Steiner points to reduce overall cost [8]. 2) Large Nets (Prim MST and Flexible L-Route): Nets with area An > 2, 500 use Prim’s minimum spanning tree (MST) on pin terminals, with Manhattan distance d(p1, p 2) = 

|x1 − x2| + |y1 − y2| + 40 |z1 − z2|. The weight of 40 is the via edge cost in the Manhattan distance to discourage the algorithm from routing through unnecessary layer changes. Each MST edge (pi, p j ) becomes a 2-pin sub-problem solved through flexible L-routing. 3) Flexible dual L-shape routing: The L-shaped paths are evaluated with Horizontal-first and Vertical-first approaches for each 2-pin connection. For each net, the congestion cost is 

Ω( path ) = P 

> (z,y,x )∈path

max(0 , −cz,y,x ), and the L-shape with the lower congestion cost is selected. The complexity for the given algorithm is O(|An|) cost per net without overhead and latency of searching for the shortest path. The metal layer for routing is assigned by the L-route through maximum remaining capacity among all layers whose segment orientation matches the preferred direction. Specifically, for a horizontal segment the selected layer is z∗ = arg max z ¯cz ,where ¯cz is the mean remaining capacity along the segment’s GCell range. This reduces the fixed two-layer assignments and reduces initial overflow by 2.2x on the full ARIANE design 

(2 , 239 , 467 → 1, 029 , 699) . Overflow, computed once initial routing completes, is defined as: 

Ω = X

> z,y,x

max(0 , −cz,y,x ) (2) Here cz,y,x is the remaining capacity after routing, which is negative if wire demand is exceeding supply. If Ω = 0 ,the overflow of the circuit is zero and routing is completed; otherwise, it enters the adaptive rip-up and reroute loop. 

D. Overflow Analyzer 

We use a SHAP-based approach to decompose the overflow distribution into different parameters before the R&R itera-tions. 1) Per-net overflow score: The overflow score for each net routing through GCells is: 

ψn = X

> (z,y,x )∈G n

max(0 , −cz,y,x ) (3) Here ψn uses the same per-cell overflow measure as Ω

(Eq. (2)), but is restricted to GCell set Gn occupied by net 

n, such that Ω ≤ P 

> n

ψn since nets may be sharing congested cells. The nets are ranked by direct contribution to congestion 

ψn. The top 20% nets causing overflow are ripped up and rerouted. 2) Layer-wise overflow decomposition: Identifies metal lay-ers having most congestion: 

λz =

P 

> y,x

max(0 , −cz,y,x )

P 

> z,y,x

max(0 , −cz,y,x ) . (4) The dominant layers z∗ = arg max z λz are passed to the adaptive policy and LLM analyzer. 3) Congested cell fraction: This measures how closely cell utilization predicts overflow and is used to choose from history-driven and present-driven cost inflation. 

fc = |{ (z, y, x ) : cz,y,x < 0}| 

NL · ymax · xmax 

(5) 

fc is congested cell fraction, defined as the ratio of GCells with negative remaining capacity to the total grid size. 4) Utilization-overflow correlation: Cell utilization is de-fined as uz,y,x = 1 − cz,y,x /c 0

> z,y,x

, where c0 

> z,y,x

is the original capacity from the cap file. A SHAP-style permutation importance analyzer that decomposes post-routing overflow [7] is implemented without the external SHAP library; it runs in under 0.1 s on a 4.17 M-cell grid. The Pearson correlation between cell utilization and the binary overflow is computed over all cells as: 

ruo = Cov (u, max(0 , −c)) 

σu · σmax(0 ,−c)

(6) TABLE I: Adaptive Policy Rules                                                                                       

> SHAP signal Condition Policy action Congested cell fraction fc<0.02 Increase pf
> Util-overflow correlation ruo >0.5Increase α
> Layer concentration λz∗>0.50 Decrease via cost
> INPUT: Routing iteration 1metrics: - Overflow (L2): 258,229 -Overflow delta from init: +0.0% -Congested cells: 1.15% of grid -Util-overflow correlation: 0.237 -Top layer overflow: 50.1% -Current alpha: 0.4000 -Current present factor: 2.000 -Current via cost: 40.0 -Vias ripped this iteration: 0
> {"path_action": "INCREASE", "pf_action": "INCREASE", "via_action": "DECREASE", "alpha_value": 0.8, "pf_value": 4.0, "via_value": 30.0, "reasoning": "High overflow, concentrated congestion, and high top layer overflow indicate need for stronger penalties and via cost reduction to spread routing demand." }

Fig. 2: Example policy query at iteration 1: structured SHAP metrics sent to the LLM (blue) and the returned JSON parameter update with rationale (green). A high value of correlation (ruo > 0.5) is an indication of cell utilization being a reliable predictor of overflow, forcing the policy to increase the history penalty weight α. A low correlation is an indication of congestion being structurally driven (e.g., macro blockages) rather than demand-driven, in which case the history penalty weight is not increased. 

E. LLM Log Analyzer 

LLMs are invoked after SHAP analysis is completed. A structured metric prompt is generated and sent to a locally running Ollama instance hosting Llama 3.2 3B. Groq API endpoints hosting Llama 3.3 70B and GPT-OSS 120B were used for the ablation configurations to generate the logs. The prompt contains seven fields: current overflow ΩL2, overflow delta from the initial routing ∆Ω , congested cell fraction fc,utilization-overflow correlation ruo , dominant layer overflow percentage 100 λz∗ , current α, and current pf . The LLM returns a structured JSON object containing actions and values for α, pf and via cost, plus a short natural-language rationale. The values suggested by LLMs are applied after checking validity from hard-coded rules from the knowledge graph, otherwise the SHAP adaptive policy rules described in Table I are applied. 

F. Adaptive PathFinder Policy 

The scalar parameters are used to govern the cost model: α

(history penalty growth rate), pf (present overflow), and wvia 

(via cost, initial 40). 1) History cost update: The history cost array h is updated for every edge e at the end of iteration k:

h(k+1) (e) = h(k)(e) + α(k) · max(0 , −ce), (7) where ce = min( cz,y 1,x 1 , c z,y 2,x 2 ) is the minimum remain-ing capacity of two cells incident to the edge. The history array is persistent across all R&R iterations; cells that are repeatedly congested accumulate an increasing penalty. 2) Reroute cost: The Dijkstra algorithm uses combined edge cost during rerouting: 

cost (e) = W (e) + h(k)(e) + p(k) 

> f

· max(0 , −ce), (8) where W (e) is the weight from Eq. (1). The three additive terms correspond to: the capacity-weighted base cost, accu-mulated history penalty from past iterations, and the present state overflow penalty pf .3) Automatic alpha growth: α grows by a factor of 1.15 each iteration, α(k+1) = α(k) × 1.15 , ensuring the history penalty increases even without LLM input. 4) SHAP-driven parameter rules: Table I showcases three rules for which SHAP can override the default parameter trajectory. wvia is decreased when one layer dominates the overflow; this forces the router to use other metal layers. 

G. Rip-Up Candidate Selection 

Given the SHAP scores computed by Eq. (3), the rip-up candidate set for iteration k is: 

R(k) = {n ∈ N : ψn ≥ ψ⌊(1 −ρ)|N |⌋ } (9) where ρ = 0 .20 is the rip-up fraction and N is the set of nets with ψ > 0. This selects the top 20% of nets ranked by overflow contribution. The capacity consumed by each ripped net is restored before routing begins. The routing demand of the cell for that given net is incremented for every GCell (z,y,x) that is now occupying the ripped net n. This is to ensure that Dijkstra can find the optimum path while considering the capacity of ripped cells. The number of ripped nets decreases monotonically in the full ARIANE design across different iterations. 

H. Dijkstra Maze Rerouting 

Nets having area between 2, 500 < A n ≤ 15 , 000 use 3D Dijkstra maze routing during the R&R. A local RustworkX graph is built over the net bounding box with a margin of 

δ = 2 and having edge weights from Eq. (8). The shortest path with Dijkstra detours around congested hotspots. Small nets 

(An ≤ 2, 500) use Steiner trees; large nets (An > 15 , 000) 

use MST+FlexL. 

I. Knowledge Graph 

The Knowledge Graph is a graph built on RustworkX which keeps a record of routing decisions and outcomes of routing across all R&R iterations. It keeps a record of three node types:  

> •

Pattern: Characteristics of the net at the time of rerouting consisting of net size, dominant layer, and overflow level 

λz . 

> •

Strategy: Keeps track of the routing algorithm and active policy parameters (α(k), p (k) 

> f

, w (k)

> via

). 

> •

Outcome: the result ∆Ω = Ω (k) −Ω(k−1) of applying the strategy to the pattern. IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

All experiments were run on a single NVIDIA A40 GPU (48 GB VRAM), 48 GB system RAM, 9 vCPUs, and 40 GB disk. The router and ablation framework were implemented in Python with open-source libraries, and the LLM-enabled runs used the Groq Open Models API for model inference in the policy-analysis loop. 

A. Benchmarks 

We evaluate AlphaRoute across benchmarks from the blind dataset of ISPD 2025. The benchmarks are ARIANE (10 layers, 646 × 646 GCells, 105,924 nets), BSG (10 layers, 

1384 × 1384 GCells, 768,239 nets), MEMPOOL (10 layers, 

1120 × 1120 GCells, 157,744 nets), and NVDLA (10 layers, 

386 × 386 GCells, 135,814 nets). All the benchmarks consist of .cap and .net input formats. 

B. Ablation Configurations 

Eight cumulative ablations are evaluated. A1 is the Steiner tree baseline. A2 adds flexible L-routing. A3 adds SHAP-driven rip-up and reroute. A4 adds Dijkstra maze rerouting (Section III-H). A5 activates the knowledge graph. A6 adds Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based congestion scoring. A7 and A8 add LLM-guided policy adaptation using Llama 3.3 70B and GPT-OSS 120B, respectively. 

C. LLM Ablation 

We compared two model families through the same prompt format and constraints: Llama 3.3 70B Versatile 128k and GPT-OSS 120B 128k, both served via the Groq Open Models API. Across benchmarks, differences in WNS and TNS be-tween models were not statistically meaningful, indicating the policy modification layer is largely model-agnostic since hard constraints and SHAP signals dominate final decisions. V. R ESULTS 

The routing benchmark used in this work follows the ISPD 2025 Global Routing Contest specification, which defines the scoring metric Sorig , the congestion penalty Soverflow and the runtime penalty score Sscaled . AlphaRoute achieves Sorig =0.0538 and Sscaled = 0.0589 in ARIANE, representing a 

33 .1× reduction in the original score and a 29 .5× reduction in the scaled score relative to the current SOTA values of 

Sorig = 1 .780 and Sscaled = 1 .74 (ARIANE), demonstrating that the overflow reduction delivered by AlphaRoute decisively outweighs its runtime overhead in the final metric. Our wall-clock runtime is approximately 136 × above the contest median (tmed = 19 s), which can be attributed to two compounding factors: (1) our implementation is written entirely in Python rather than the optimized C++ employed by top contest entries, and (2) our experiments used a more constrained cloud instance than the contest reference hardware (200 GB RAM, 8 CPU cores, NVIDIA A100 (PG506-230) with 40 GB GPU memory). We acknowledge this runtime overhead as a limitation; future work will address it through a C++/Rust re-implementation or GPU-accelerated path search. 

A. Overflow Analysis 

The overflow is presented across eight ablations and four benchmark circuits. The overflow reduction is consistent as each component is progressively added. The overflow score for baseline A1 is the highest overflow across all of the benchmarks with 1,517,789 for ARIANE, 7,600,283 for BSG, 124,450 for MEMPOOL and 19,297,016 for NVDLA. L-routing (A2) reduces it drastically by 82 .9% 

for ARIANE, 79 .1% for MEMPOOL, 43 .6% for BSG and 

43 .3% for NVDLA. This conveys that L-routing very effi-ciently routes large nets. In A3, SHAP-based rip-up and reroutes are added for nets causing overflow. This reduces overflow for ARIANE to ∼241,811 and MEMPOOL to ∼19,438. However, BSG and NVDLA are comparable with A2, indicating that SHAP-driven rip-up and rerouting is more effective on circuits having concentrated congestion hotspots. The addition of Dijkstra maze routing in A4 produces the second major improvement, as the reduction in ARIANE is 6.3% , MEMPOOL is 14 .2% and NVDLA is 35% . BSG remains unchanged compared to A3, which suggests that structural congestion may be resistant to maze routing alone. The overflow reduction from A5 through A8 remains marginal. The similar overflow between A4 and A5 proves that the knowledge graph is only used for recording previous iterations’ policy parameters. Ablation of GNN achieves a small improvement on MEMPOOL to ∼1,726. Further, LLM-guided policy adaptation yields identical re-sults to A4 and A5 and proves that overflow reduction is saturated and LLMs contribute more to interpretability than to direct overflow reductions. The slight increase in overflow for A7 and A8 is due to LLM-suggested parameter adjustments that slightly over-penalize congested GCells on a design that has already reached near-optimal routing under GNN ordering, as shown in the plot of the impact of overflow due to LLMs in Fig. 3. 

Fig. 3: Overflow with and without LLM-guided policy adap-tation (A6 vs. A7/A8); LLMs slightly over-penalize designs already near optimal, contributing interpretability rather than further reduction. Overall, the results demonstrate that flexible L-routing (A2), SHAP-guided rip-up (A3), and Dijkstra maze routing (A4) account for most overflow reductions, while GNNs and LLMs provide interpretability. (a) ARIANE (b) BSG 

(c) MEMPOOL (d) NVDLA 

Fig. 5: R&R convergence curves (overflow L2 vs. iteration) for configurations A3–A8 across all four benchmarks. 

Fig. 4: Absolute overflow across cumulative ablations A1–A8 for all four benchmarks; most reduction is delivered by L-routing (A2), SHAP rip-up (A3), and maze routing (A4). 

B. R&R Convergence Analysis 

Fig. 5 shows overflow convergence over three R&R iter-ations for A3–A8. On ARIANE, A4–A8 converge steeply from ∼260,000 at iteration 0 to ∼148,000 by iteration 3; MEMPOOL follows the same trend, dropping from ∼25,000 to below ∼2,000 (a 92% reduction) by iteration 2, and NVDLA falls from ∼1.1 ×10 7 to ∼4.0 ×10 6. In every case A3 plateaus early, confirming that Dijkstra maze routing is needed to escape local congestion minima on large or structurally congested designs. BSG illustrates the LLM’s role: A8 converges sub-linearly as the LLM shifts from overflow reduction to logged reasoning once routing nears its optimum, so LLM guidance helps most when residual congestion is significant and alternative paths exist. The near-identical A4–A7 trajectories on ARIANE and MEMPOOL confirm that the KG, GNN, and LLM layers do not alter convergence dynamics. VI. C ONCLUSION 

AlphaRoute demonstrates that SHAP-driven overflow de-composition, adaptive PathFinder tuning, Dijkstra maze rerout-ing, and LLM-guided policy adaptation can be composed into a single closed-loop system that reduces congestion by up to two orders of magnitude on ISPD 2025 benchmarks, achieving an original score over 33x lower than the published state of the art on ARIANE despite a pure Python implementation. Ablations confirm that flexible L-routing, SHAP-targeted rip-up, and maze rerouting account for nearly all overflow re-duction, while the knowledge graph and LLM layers provide interpretability without degrading routing quality, and the pol-icy loop remains model-agnostic across LLM families. Future work includes porting critical loops to compiled code or GPU kernels to close the runtime gap, distilling a compact routing-specific language model from accumulated knowledge-graph logs, and extending the SHAP analyzer to capture net-to-net coupling for structurally congested designs where per-net marginal scores are least effective. REFERENCES [1] “ISPD 2025 contest: Performance-driven global routing,” 2025, contest specification and benchmarks. [Online]. Available: https: //github.com/liangrj2014/ISPD25 contest [2] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, “The rectilinear steiner tree problem is NP-complete,” SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics , vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 826–834, 1977. [3] J. Liu, C.-W. Pui, F. Wang, and E. F. Y. Young, “CUGR: Detailed-routability-driven 3d global routing with probabilistic resource model,” in Proceedings of the 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6. [4] S. Lin, L. Xiao, J. Liu, and E. F. Y. Young, “InstantGR: Scalable GPU parallelization for global routing,” in Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (IC-CAD) . IEEE/ACM, 2024. [5] L. McMurchie and C. Ebeling, “PathFinder: a negotiation-based performance-driven router for FPGAs,” in Proceedings of the Third International ACM Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) . ACM, 1995, pp. 111–117. [6] R. A. Solovyev, I. A. Mkrtchan, D. V. Telpukhov, I. I. Shafeev, A. Y. Romanov, Y. V. Stolbikov, and A. L. Stempkovsky, “PAGR: Accelerating global routing for VLSI design flow,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 6440– 6450, 2025. [7] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 30, 2017, pp. 4765–4774. [8] C. Chu and Y.-C. Wong, “FLUTE: Fast lookup table based rectilinear steiner minimal tree algorithm for VLSI design,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 70–83, 2008. [9] P. Veliˇ ckovi´ c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Li` o, and Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2018. [10] A. Mirhoseini, A. Goldie, M. Yazgan, J. W. Jiang, E. Songhori, S. Wang, Y.-J. Lee, E. Johnson, O. Pathak, A. Nova, J. Pak et al. , “A graph placement methodology for fast chip design,” Nature , vol. 594, no. 7862, pp. 207–212, 2021. [11] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. P. Xing, H. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica, “Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 36, 2023. [12] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray et al. , “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 35, 2022, pp. 27 730–27 744. [13] L. Gao, J. Schulman, and J. Hilton, “Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , vol. 202, 2023. [14] U. Khandelwal, O. Levy, D. Jurafsky, L. Zettlemoyer, and M. Lewis, “Generalization through memorization: Nearest neighbor language mod-els,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2020.